here we go 5 4 3 2 1 hello yuan hey Cho
what's happening yeah good I just wish
the same for we were on camera that I
I've met a note to myself that says talk
slow talk American because although I
spent about half the year here we've
British people there's a reorientation
where you suddenly realize I was once in
a and I hop in
cactus Arizona and I was saying to the
woman right like I'll have some pancakes
whatever it was she kept looking at me
going what literally three minutes she
goes do you speak English I was like why
people fucking invented it right but no
one was there to laugh at my son Joker's
they didn't understand what the fuck I
was saying Arizona is a strange place I
really love Arizona there's great parts
like Phoenix is amazing Tucson is a
great place to but it's a Wild West sort
of a state it's one of those weird
holdover states that have a lot of weird
old-school laws like like I think you
could just walk around with a gun yeah
you can't my main experience in Phoenix
was in Arizona in fact was going out
with a group of women who were made to
come out on a chain gang wearing
t-shirts saying I was a drug addict when
members of the public mocked them in
Garrett that right was written this book
about but it spoke about the war on
drugs and i said joe arpaio yeah Sheriff
Arpaio no longer Sheriff now thankfully
but yeah and it was yeah Arizona is a
deeply weird place it's weird a lot of
really nice people but it's a hundred
and fifty thousand degrees yeah well
literally almost nobody lived there
until air-conditioning was invented
right right you see what I once made a
horrendous mistake in fact in Phoenix
where I had to walk somewhere and I
could see on the map it was like a mile
away so it's like just walk it's fine
and I get like halfway there and people
are literally stopping their cars going
are you okay because the only reason
anyone would ever walk in Phoenix was
basically if your car had broken down it
repaired to them I might have actually
just chosen to walk right plus you're so
white I am literally the meat like a
tomato
I used to go with a Brazilian who would
literally just look at my body and laugh
like you're so right
how can a human be so white I don't also
I never have a noise palate like I'm
either this albino color or red run I
never
there's no rich brown hue I have none of
my ancestors the Scottish and Swiss so
they never saw the Sun right none of my
ancestors my friend Jamie was over my
house once and he's not this friend
Jamie a different friend Jamie who's
British as well and my daughter who was
at the time I think she was like 10 or
something like that she goes she goes to
my watch shows mommy he's so white and
she and she goes yeah she goes no no
like he's white like paper
Jamie became Jamie white like paper
description of my lack of pigment is
curly true it's funny that we how much
we appreciate the English accent though
the English accent is like one of the
best tools for selling things to very
gullible Americans whether it's people
benefit from constant positive
discrimination in the United States it's
like having a 10-inch dick just having a
British accent
people oh my god you got an accent all
humans have accents I've just got you
know it looks like it's of a cherished
one we look really it makes you feel
like you're more sophisticated you're
more well-read you're more aware of the
world I mean I just AM sophisticated and
well write anyway you know but you get
this constant
yeah constantly people are scribing to
you much better qualities than you
actually have but what does it work in
Reverse like in in England what is the
reaction to American accents is it's
mostly discussed right no there's a
mixture Americans weaker I always think
like the relationship of Britain markets
like one of those police mirrors because
we grow up constantly looking at the
United States right we're constantly
staring through we are immersed in
American culture but when Americans look
back at us they're just seeing like a
reflection of themselves I mean
Americans watch Downton Abbey and know
about like the Queen or whatever but I
but there isn't that two-way dialogue
that there is that the the you know the
yeah so it's a slightly weird so I think
we feel very American right I spent half
the year here and I you know every now
and then you come up against these deep
cultural differences that you're just
like Oh
okay right this is really not my culture
right and it's a those moments of
disorientation are really strange like
give me one for an example well there's
a question that Americans ask all the
time but I have literally never heard of
European ask right that's the question
what's your story every American you can
go to the most crusty right-wing person
coming at a moral argot or a kid in West
Baltimore and you can say what's your
story and they'll have an answer the
only context I can imagine a British
person saying what's your story would be
in a police interrogation it would be an
extremely hostile question what's your
story right it would be you just
wouldn't ever say it right we don't
Americans narrative eyes their lives in
a way I absolutely love and as a
journalist who writes books about like
depression addiction and you want people
to talk about their lives it's an
unbelievable gift tea right that people
will tell you I've never once been on a
bus in Mississippi and sitting next to a
woman and within five minutes of
chatting tersh you told me about like
had two miscarriages how her mother
hated her and I thought if we were Swiss
where my dad's from you wouldn't tell me
this until we got married and maybe not
even then right so there's a level of
candor and storytelling among Americans
it's one of the best things about this
this this you know fucked up an amazing
place I just love in it there's
something about there's a there's a kind
of narrative openness that's very
different about this place than Europe
anywhere in Europe now when you would
talk to people in England you you guys
don't have the same level of social me
not social media but of reality
television
you have some like big brother but you
don't have it to the extent that we have
it here right yeah it hasn't well I mean
your country has literally been taken
over by television right we have a
reality and president no it hasn't
conquered the whole culture in that way
well he's a reality television president
but he's sort of a game show host
president like that's how I used to
describe myself and I was hosting Fear
Factor there like you host a reality
show my sort of it's a game show it's
just a fucked up game show it's like and
Trump was hosting a game show
essentially right it was a contest
it wasn't like Keeping Up with the
Kardashians that's a true reality show
because there's literally nothing going
on other than these people's lie
and whatever orchestrated bullshit they
put in to make it more interesting yeah
I hadn't thought of it that way I think
because but I think that's part of the
thing that I was getting to about
Americans always wanted to give you
their narrative they always want to give
you the story of their life so when
someone says what's your story they're
ready have it ready you know because
it's almost like we feel like we're in
some sort of a small television show all
the time or some sort of small
production it's like almost part of our
who we are yeah every American thinks
that the star of their own movie my yeah
he said this but someone realizes you
know sometimes in life you realize
you're just the extra right you're in
the corner of the shop right right and
then yeah I think that's true and I
think that's that's not as true of
British people or I think there's
certain how to put it like there's a
certain kind of self deprecation you're
taught as a British person you're taught
and I had to kind of unlearn it living
here
so what be examples I forget where I
read this story so maybe it's not true
but I remember here's ago so we had
these terrible subway bombs in 2005
which we remember for young British men
go on to the London Underground and
murder I think it was over 50 people and
two weeks later another group of jihadis
tried to do the same thing but they
hadn't built the bombs very well so they
go down into the subway and the there's
a loud bang but it doesn't connect with
the detonator so there's a loud bang
that doesn't actually below everyone up
obviously people freaked the fuck out as
you can imagine right and I forget maybe
this isn't and maybe this is a story
that someone told that wasn't actually
true but it's I think it reveals
something very very something about our
British character so if I remember
rightly three of the Bombers escaped on
the escape on the day in a caught like a
few hours later and one of them's caught
on at the time right and someone I think
it was an off-duty fire officer in the
story chases after them for ages chasing
after the guy for ages while everyone
else is running the fuck away and it
catches the guy and he throws him to the
ground and what he said to him was that
the off-duty fire officer says to the
attempted suicide bomber you rude rude
man right and what I love about that is
like the idea that suicide bombing is
just like bad manners right it's like
it's just impolite right or even a
better example which is true it was
reported that time definitely was during
the riots we had in 2011 in
London there was one place I forget
right is where they broke into a luxury
goods store and they could only make it
was very strong window so they could
only make a hole in the corner of the
window and it was caught on the security
cameras that the rioters formed a line
to go in and loot the store right that's
how deep the idea of like keyring and
making a line is in British culture even
in a riot we're like I know I think you
were you were before me right there
Kilian friend is about Bank hey he lives
in he lives in London and she like if
I've ever heard funny bug does she read
that be like you fucking English you
don't know how to riot this in a Roger
probably a cue what's wrong with you
people right you guys don't have Black
Friday sales do you know what they've
just started yeah it's an unfortunate
business that might be the end of you
million surviving Black Friday right
there's something about those deals when
people get that bargain and then they
open that door ready go and people pile
through all humanity gets tossed aside
why stay get you into the fucking
financial desperation of ordinary
Americans right it's a little bit of
that but it's also the competitive
nature of those things where you're
trying to grab the few remaining items
that are 25% off and even saving for
this TV for six months and there it is
right in front of you and you charge and
people are fighting left and right it's
awful it's just a terrible way for
people to you know they interact with
each other so what do you got it for me
I was reinstituted as we talked last
time about my book about depression
losses and one thing stresses me as we
talk about the book I wrote about
addiction and the war on drugs and it
really was that outlast I mean yeah yes
a book that came out a few sports just
come out in a new edition with his loads
of extra material particular about the
opioid crisis and essentially because so
you added to it yeah loads of new stuff
because there are books about 5 years
old now and although with loads of new
stuff now but you know it was saying I
cared about for this really like
personal reason in that one of my
earliest memories is her trying to wake
up one of my relatives and not not being
able to I didn't I don't understand why
then because I was a little boy but as I
got older I realized we had drug
addiction in my family
and it got to the point where I was
writing chasing the screen my book about
the drug war about I guess I started
eight years ago
and some of the people I loved were in a
really shitty condition terrible state
and I was trying to figure out what to
do nothing I was doing was working
nothing I was doing was helping and I
decided what okay well there are lots of
people all over the world are trying to
deal with this problem I want to go and
meet with them talk with them so I ended
up going on this big journey it took
three years I travelled over 30,000
miles I wanted to sit with you know
people who'd been through addiction
it'll actually led to a lot other
aspects of the war on drugs which I
think as important as the what we do
about addiction I want to sit with the
places that had the harshest possible
policies like we mentioned Arizona where
I went out with this these women were
made to go out on chain gangs that are
humiliated and and and tormented Vietnam
where they make people with addiction
problems go into literally forced labor
camps and the places that had the most
compassionate possible policies like
Portugal where they decriminalized all
drugs with incredible results
Switzerland with a legalized heroin
incredible results and and I guess I
ended up just spending so much time it's
such a crazy mixture of people from her
you know transgendered crack dealer in
Brooklyn who ended up actually being one
of the smartest people I know - a hit
man for the deadliest Mexican drug
cartel and he's definitely not one of
the smartest people I know and and I
learned loads of things but I guess the
heart of what I learned is just so much
of what we've been told about this for
so long it's now a hundred years since
we started fighting the war on drugs in
this country and it was then imposed on
the rest of the world so much of what
we're told is wrong drugs aren't what we
think they are addiction isn't what we
think it is the war on drugs isn't what
we think it is and the alternatives to
the war on drugs aren't what we think
they are so in some ways it's kind of
dawning - Rick go all over the world and
realize so much of what we take for
granted isn't right but that opens up
this whole exciting other set of
possibilities the the main reason why
people assume that people do drugs is to
escape reality what do you think is the
the primary thing that they're running
from so you've gotta separate out two
things and this surprised me because my
family's experience was pretty bad and
catastrophic addiction but most drug use
even the main drug war body in the world
the UN office of Drug Control admits
that 90% of all currently banned drug
use is what they call non problematic so
the person isn't addicted and it doesn't
damage their health right so 90%
so let's set that aside we'll come back
to that okay there's like 90% that's
recreational use where people use
because it makes their lives better
right then you've got the 10 Harvey sip
of wine at work or C or a whole range a
whole range of currently cannabis a
whole range of currently illegal drugs
and in most cases there are some people
who have addictions to cannabis and B so
that you then got got to ask well what's
happening with this 10% who have got a
problem right what's going on and one of
the things that really blew my mind in
the research were chasing The Scream was
realizing I had deeply misunderstood
what addiction is I had misunderstood
the thing I thought I had been seeing in
front of me since I was a kid right so
most people let's think about heroin
addiction because that was close to me
most people if we stopped the next
twenty people to walk past your you know
your studio and we said to them what
causes heroin addiction I think they'd
look at us like we were stupid and
they'd say well the clues in the name
dipshit write heroin causes her in
addiction we've been told this story for
a hundred years that's become totally
part of our our common sense right we
think if we took the we took the next 20
people after that who walked past the
studio and we injected them all with
heroin every day for a month at the end
of that month they'd all be heroin
addicts for a simple reason there's
chemical hooks in heroin that their
bodies would start to desperately
physically need and we think that a lot
of people think that's what addiction is
right is this physical hunger for the
chemical hook inside the drug right and
there is some reality to Chemical hooks
they exist they're real but that's
actually mmm a very small part of what's
going on the first thing that alerted me
to the fact there's something wrong with
that story we've been told because when
it was explained to me by loads of
doctors in Britain where I'm from if you
step out into the street and you get hit
by a truck and you break your hip you'll
be taken to hospital and you'll be
giving loads of a drug called diamine
diamorphine is heroin right it's the
medical name for heroin it's the stuff
you'll be giving the hospital is much
better than the shit you buy on the
street because it's medically pure it's
you know not contaminated and if what we
think about addiction is right that it's
just caused by exposure to the drug what
should be happening to all these people
in British hospitals have been given
loads of heroin right anyone watching
this podcast who's got a British
grandmother
who's had a hip replacement operation
your grandmother's taking a shit ton of
heroin right and if what we think is
right that addiction is caused primarily
by exposure to the chemical hooks the
lives of these people should believe in
hospital and trying to score on the
streets right this has been studied very
carefully it virtually never happens
right and when I learned that it just
seems so weird to me I thought it
couldn't possibly be true right how
could it be you've got someone in a
hospital bed who's taking loads of
really potent heroin they don't become
addicted and in the alleyway outside
you've got someone who's using actually
a weaker form of the drug who becomes
addicted how can that be what's
happening here and I only began to
understand it
when I when I went to Vancouver and met
this amazing man could professor Bruce
Alexander who did an experiment that's
really transformed how we think about
addiction all over the world it's led to
a new way of thinking and loads of new
evidence so professor Alexander
explained to me this story that we've
been told right the addiction is caused
by the chemical hooks primarily comes
from a series of experiments that were
done earlier in the 20th century they're
really simple experiments your viewers
can try them at home if they're feeling
a little bit shitty today right you take
a rat you put it in a cage and you give
it two water bottles one is just water
and the other is water laced with either
heroin or cocaine you might remember in
the 1980s there's a famous partnership
for drug-free America add this that
shows this experiment right and the rat
in this cage starts to drink there it
always prefers the heroin water and
almost always kills itself within a week
or two right so there you go that's
that's our story the you you're exposed
to the drug it takes you over and then
you just die right but in the 70s
professor Alexander comes along and says
he was working with people with
addiction problems and he's like hang on
a minute
we put these rats alone in an empty cage
they've got nothing that makes life
meaningful for rats right what would
happen if we did this differently so he
built a cage that he called rat Park
which is basically like heaven for rats
right
they got loads of friends they got as a
cheese they got as a colored balls they
could have loads of sex anything a rat
finds meaningful in life is there in rat
Park and they've got both the water
bottles the normal water and the drug
water and of course they try but if they
don't know what's in them
anything in rat Park they don't like the
water very much none of them ever use it
compulsively the heroin wash yep the
heroin water none of them ever use it
compulsively none of them ever overdose
so you go from almost 100% compulsive
use and death by overdose when their
lives are shitty to none when they have
the things that make life meaningful no
there's loads of human examples I'm sure
we'll will talk about but the the main
thing I took from this is that the
opposite of addiction is not sobriety
the opposite of addiction is connection
we have to ask ourselves what are the
contexts in which people become a dated
because there are some contexts where
people find these drugs extremely
addictive and there are some contexts
where they don't become addicted at all
there's something the drug plays a role
chemicals are real I can talk about how
we know that they play some role but
they're actually a surprisingly small
role of what's going small amount at
what's going on we know this from
there's so many examples but I give you
give another one in at the same time as
rat Park
there was an experiment going on that
everyone listen to this we've heard of
the Vietnam War right in Vietnam shit
loads of American troops were using
heroin right it was very easy to get it
out there that actually insanely they
had cracked down on cannabis and so
people have moved to heroin because
sniffer dogs can't detect and heroin as
easily as cannabis so calories was
everywhere sorry heroin was everywhere
loads of American troops were using it
and if you look at what people said at
the time the authorities the Nixon White
House they were shitting themselves
because they're like they believe this
chemical Hookes theory of addiction so
they're like fuck when this war ends we
can have you know half a million heroin
addicts on the streets of the United
States there's a really good study that
followed these these men home and it
found that the vast majority of them
just stopped right they didn't go into
rehab most of them didn't go into
horrific withdrawal some of them had an
uncomfortable flu-like symptoms but and
most of them just stopped now if you
believe this old theory that chemical
hooks take you over that makes no sense
but if you understand what Professor
Alexander is saying and that all the new
evidence about addiction that I go
through and chasing The Scream it makes
it makes perfect sense right you me
everyone in this area if I took any of
us and put us in a horrific pestilential
jungle
where we don't want to be and I made you
kill older people and potentially die at
any moment you would find heroin much
more appealing and than you do now right
if we want to understand why people turn
to painkillers we've got to understand
why they're in pain right and and and
the core of addiction it's made me I
learned from these amazing experts all
of the world the core of addiction it's
about not wanting to be present in your
life because your life is too painful a
place to be and once you understand that
you can see why what we've been doing is
such a disaster right because the theory
we have with the war on drugs think
about Arizona we can talk about that
more but I you know like I say I went to
this nightmare prison Australia prison
in in Phoenix Arizona where people are
humiliated and the theory behind that
part of the theory behind the war on
drugs is if you've got people who are
addicted
you've got to inflict pain on them to
you know give them an incentive to stop
right but once you understand that pain
is in fact the fuel of addiction it's in
fact the primary cause of addiction you
can see why sometimes people say that
doesn't work truth is much worse right
that makes addiction worse those women I
went out with and spent all that time
with who were you know humiliate I
remember in that prison we come back
from being on the chain gang where they
have to sometimes they have to dig
graves they weren't doing that the day I
was there they had to collect garbage
the day I was one of the days I was
there but we come back and normally with
prisons as a journalist they don't want
to show you anything right you're like
you have to kind of really finagle to
get them to show you anything in this
prison and it's like a pantomime of
Cruelty they want to show it to you the
whole point is to humiliate these people
right so the women I've been talking to
and the men were really terrified of
what they called the hole right is the
solitary block and so I said to the
guards will you show me the hole I was
sure they said no they're like yeah okay
I'll show ya
so go around to the the hole and these
women who put it for the most like
trivial infractions like having a
cigarette it's literally a hole right
it's like a concrete block you're on
your own there's nothing in it there's a
tiny window where you can see sunlight
no TV nothing and I remember speaking to
a woman who was in this and suddenly
thinking
this is the closest you could get to an
exact human recreation of the cages that
guaranteed addiction in rats right and
this is what we're doing thinking it
will stop these women being addicted
it's the system we've built a doctor
gave Walmart a an amazing guy said to me
you know if negative consequences
stopped addiction there won't be a
single addict in the world Ryan what
have people with addiction problems not
suffered what humiliation have they not
endured so we've got this I think we got
to really shift our perspective on what
addiction is and there are places that
have done this that have led to
incredible results the I love that rat
experiment one because that had always
been parodied as this is the proof
positive that these drugs are so
terrible for you but once they figured
out that if you take those rats and put
them in a wonderful place and they don't
have addiction it really does make you
step back and go okay what is exactly
going on here obviously there's chemical
hooks they are real like people that are
on sustained prolonged use of opiates
especially people with back injuries
have an incredibly difficult time
kicking them even really positive people
who don't necessarily have awful lives
but it's it's one of those things that
gets in your head and then you sort of
parrot it you've you've heard it you
repeat it but it's the reason why I
asked you the question it's like what
what is what is the cause for most
people you believe it's an unfulfilled
life or a painful life or a painful
self-image or remorse for your past or
like what is it that do we have like
primary reasons or primary attributes
that we attach to to these people that
are drug addicted yes so this was what
my more recent book which is called lost
connections uncovering the real causes
of depression and the unexpected
solutions is is about I think the core
of addiction is is about trying to deal
with pain right but the causes of human
pain are obviously huge but what I
learned is there's scientific evidence
for nine causes have kind of deep
despair right now if you think about
depression and the very similar factors
play out with addiction they're actually
densely interconnected
phenomena but there are real biological
factors right your genes can make you
more vulnerable to that just like some
people find it easier to put on weight
than others and there are real brain
changes that happen when you become
depressed or addicted that can make it
harder to get out right but most of the
factors that are causing this despair
are not factors in our biology they're
factors in the way we live and it is it
kind of this doesn't cover all of the
causes that I learned about philosophy
nations but it covers a lot of them
everyone watching your show knows they
have natural physical needs
obviously right you need food you need
water you need shelter you need cleaner
exactly if I took those things away from
you you'd be fucked really quickly right
but there's equally strong evidence that
all human beings have natural
psychological needs right you need to
feel you belong you need to feel your
life has meaning and purpose you need to
feel that people see you and value you
you need to feel you've got a future
that makes sense and this culture we've
built is good at lots of things that I'm
really glad to be alive today but all
sorts of reasons had to go to the
dentist the other day I'm glad to be
alive now not light hundred years ago
but there's a lot of evidence that we've
been getting less and less good at
meeting these deep underlying
psychological needs let's think about
you refer to the opioid crisis for
example see because I think even a lot
of really good people are profoundly
misunderstanding what's happening with
the the opioid crisis where is the
opioid crisis happening right I've been
to a lot of the epicenters a bit places
like Monadnock and in New Hampshire why
is why are things so disastrous there
why is there much higher opioid
addiction in West Virginia than on the
Faculty of Harvard right people in
faculty Harvard have much better access
to opioids right everyone there has good
health insurance they have much better
access what's going on the the some
amazing economists at angus dayton and
and case did a massive study of this and
they said that we need to understand the
opioid deaths mainly is what they call
deaths of despair right it's not a
coincidence that the places where opioid
addiction is highest are also the places
where suicide not with opioids is
highest where antidepressant
prescriptions are highest as a whole
these things are clustering together for
a reason right and you don't have to
spend much time in those places to see
people through no fault of their own
have unlike the rats in that first cage
right they have been deprived of the
things that
like meaningful it doesn't mean chemical
hooks don't play some role they do play
a role but I've been to the places that
have solved this and it wasn't by
thinking primarily about that so just
talk about the reality Chemical hooks oh
that's right key things very important
to understand in relation to opioids
this is a very strong agreement among
scientists that the most powerful
chemical hook we know is nicotine right
you smoke cigarettes like my mother
smoked 70 cigarettes a day you smokes
cigarettes the thing you feel a physical
craving for when you stop which my
mother would never - is is nicotine
right that's the chemical hook and and
so in the late 80s when nicotine patches
were invented there's this huge wave of
optimism among scientists could they're
like oh right cigarette smoking is an
addiction to the chemical hook nicotine
now we can give people all the chemical
hook they're addicted to without any of
this shitty cancer-causing smoke people
are going to stop smoking right so
nicotine patches are introduced and the
US Surgeon General's report a couple of
years later finds highly motivated
people using nicotine patches 17% of
them will stop smoking right that's
important to say that is not nothing
right that means if you meet the
chemical hook for people who are
addicted to cigarettes 17% of them will
stop entirely that's a big deal right
that saved a huge number of people's
lives but obviously 17% is not 100% that
leaves 83% they've got to be explained
by the other things and that's really
the factors that I talked about in in
lost connections so I mean there's a
whole range of them but you know if you
are acutely lonely we are the loneliest
Society there's ever been right you are
much more likely to be vulnerable to
despair depression addiction if you are
controlled and humiliated at work which
most people now are to some degree
you're much more vulnerable to these
things there's a whole range of go
through nine of these these factors in
the book but it's me the most important
thing in thinking about the opioid
crisis um I find it really frustrating
that this is never discussed in the
American debate is I've been to the
place that solves an opioid crisis that
had a disastrous opioid crisis and ended
it right and they did something that's
very different what Americans are being
urged to do so I'm a Swiss citizen
because my dad's from there so I
Switzerland well and by the time you get
to the year 2000 Switzerland is having
like an opioid
nightmare right people can look up
videos from the time but you know people
like Swiss people are obsessed with
order it's not a coincidence they
invented clocks and all that shit right
like in their public parks people like
injecting in the neck like nightmare
scenes right that'd be bad anywhere but
to Swiss people this is like their worst
nightmare right and they try all sorts
of things they try the American Way
arresting people punishing people
shaming people and it just keeps getting
worse and worse
and then one day they get this this
incredible woman called Ruth Dreyfus I
got to know later who becomes the
Minister of Health and then the
president the first ever female
president of Switzerland and she
explains to people I think the solution
is to legalize heroin and she said I
know that sounds really shocking because
when you hear the word legalization what
you picture is anarchy and chaos
she said what we have now is anarchy and
chaos right we have unknown criminals
selling unknown chemicals to unknown
drug users all in the dark all filled
with violence disease and chaos
legalization she explained is the way we
restore order to this madness right so
the way it works isn't spent a lot of
time in these places and obviously no or
maybe there's some really hardcore
libertarians but almost no one believes
we should legalize heroin the way
alcohol or cannabis illegal right no one
thinks there should be a heroin aisle in
CVS that's not the pattern right well
Judy Switzerland is if you had a heroin
problem you were assigned to a clinic I
went a lot of time in the one in Geneva
the former president Ruth Dreyfus lives
opposite this clinic I think that tells
you something and likes across the
street across the street what what what
it it's the way it works is she should
move well but if you see the clinic
right so the way it works is you have to
go to the clinic at seven o'clock in the
morning cos Swiss people believe in
doing things really fucking early it's
constant disagreement between me and my
dad you turn up you go in they give you
your heroin there they give you a
medically pure heroin you can't take it
out with you you've got to use it there
partly because they don't want you to
sell it on but mainly because they want
to monitor you to make sure you don't
overdose you use it there and then you
leave to go to your job because you're
given a load of support to get housing
work
and therapy to figure out why you can't
bear to be present in your life right so
it's really important they give two
things this puts bear in mind these two
things gets the opposite of what we're
doing the moment here
give them the safest possible version of
the drug and give them massive amounts
of help to deal with the reasons why
they need that drug now I'll be giving
the drug of the injecting yeah they know
they the individual injects himself or
herself so if you if you were the
patient I'm the nurse I give you the
heroin and I give you a clean syringe
and one of the things that really
surprised me at first I found really
weird is they will give you any dose of
heroin that you want apart from one that
would kill you and there is never any
pressure to cut back and yeah I went
there when it was 13 years after this
had first started and there was almost
nobody on the program from the start
there were like three people who've been
there the whole time almost everyone
does cut back and stop overtime and I
remember saying to Rita mangey who's the
chief psychiatrist there well well how
can that be because we're told the
chemical hooks taking over you need more
and more if you had a limited supply you
would just carry on forever what how
could how could how do you explain this
and she looked to me like I was done and
she said well we help them and their
lives get better and as your life gets
better you don't want to be anesthetized
so much which once that's explained to
you is so obvious right but and it's
worth just explaining the results of the
Swiss program in the feel it's 15 years
now and the 15 years since this began
according to the best scientific
evidence but professor Ambrose Orton
Hagen have shown that had been zero
deaths overdose deaths on legal heroin
not one person there's been a massive
fall in overdose deaths outside the
legal program because people transfer in
because why would you carry on using
expensive shitty street drugs when you
could be getting you know help and given
the drug for free and and once it was
fascinating about this is Swiss people
are really conservative right my Swiss
relatives make Donald Trump look like
Oprah and yet Swiss people after this
had been in practice for five years had
a referendum on whether to get rid of it
and 70% of Swiss people voted to keep
heroin legal not because they're so
compassionate to be honest that's not
but they're not they're really
it was cuz crime fell so much right it's
much cheaper to get a selfie crown fall
I've got the statistics in the book as
fear since I wrote it but there was I
think something like a 50% fall in
street street crime street prostitution
literally ended right there was no
street prostitution after that turns out
women you know don't want to be on the
street being fucked by random strangers
but somebody if they've got like an
alternative who knew but the it was an
enormous fallen crime across the board
and police confirmed that everyone
agrees with that in switzerland and all
the kind of anarchy in the streets just
just stopped right but what the reason i
think this is really relevant to the
opioid crisis is what we're doing is the
exact opposite right
so they give them the safe version of
the drug give them help to figure out
why practical support to change their
environment to get out of that isolate
occasion and walk into a life that's
more like rat park what do we do if your
doctor in this country finds out that
you are using say percocet or oxy not
because you've got back pain but because
you've got an addiction your doctor by
law has to cut you off right they don't
they can be busted as a dealer it's
happened to lots of doctors and they
have to cut you off so you instead of
giving you the drug we stop you getting
the drug most people then not most a
very large number then transfer to much
more dangerous street drugs like heroin
secondly far from giving you help to
turn your life around we give you a
criminal record we shame you we
stigmatize you
we put barriers between you and
reconnecting the opposite of addiction
is connection but what do we do we put
barriers between people and reconnecting
this is why that's one part of it right
so there's the drug policy part of it
where we're doing exactly the opposite
of the country that succeeded in ending
its opioid epidemic but there's
something i think there's even deeper
than that which you really see in places
like West Virginia Monadnock the kind of
hearts of the opioid crisis which is
we're also creating a society that it's
becoming harder and harder for people to
be present in especially in those in
those places that there's an analogy I
keep thinking of in the in the 18th
century in Britain loads of people were
driven out of the countryside into these
disgusting urban slums in like London
and Manchester and and something
happened that the
it's been well-documented there was
so-called the gin craze right
we're basically shit loads of people
just became alcoholics drank gin until
they died right there's a famous
painting from the time called gin lane
of a mother down in like a bottle of
vodka while a baby like falls out the
window right and things like that really
were happening you look at what people
said at the time very similar to what
they're saying now they said look at
this evil drug gin look what it's
fucking done to us if only we could get
rid of this evil drug gin this problem
would go away right we know now when we
look back at the gin craze it can have
been gin that caused it because anyone
in Britain who's over the age of 18 can
go and buy gin right and while we still
have some alcoholics to be sure we don't
have mass epidemics of alcoholism we
don't have babies falling out of windows
what changed wasn't the amount of
availability
it wasn't the availability of the drug
the drug is more available now than it
was then what change was the amount of
pain and distress in the society right
we don't have a society we've brought as
profoundly disorientated I mean it's
going up because we're creating more
disorientation so we if you create a
society where people's basic
psychological needs are not met right
where they have a shrinking number of
friends and social connections where
they're taught that life is about money
and buying shit and displaying it on
Instagram excuse me where they spend
most of their time at jobs they find
unfulfilled controlling and humiliating
you're going to create growing pools of
people who caught any by the way that if
you're constantly insecure financially
insecure half of all Americans have
through no fault of their own have been
able to set aside $500 for if an
emergency comes along she creates
pervasive insecurity in the society
you're gonna create very large numbers
of people who are gonna want and feel a
need to anesthetize themselves now
that's not a good solution obviously I
don't think heroin opioids these are not
good solutions to these problems but but
it's not a crazy solution either there's
a line I think of all the time I don't
quite it very Linkous people can really
react against this insight but I think
it's actually important you know
Marianne Faithfull the great like 60s
British singer she went out with Mick
Jagger annoyingly that's why people
remember she's much better than me
Jagger and in her memoir she shot a
heroine addiction in the 60 she was
homeless for
she has this very challenging line that
I think about a lot I'm gonna phrase it
slightly wrong but she said and heroin
saved my life
because if it wasn't for heroin I would
have killed myself at that point right
now Marianne Faithfull is not saying
heroin was a good solution to her
homelessness but we've got to understand
this drug use is happening because it
performs a function right one of the
most important things I learned for both
my books but chasing scream and lost
connection is that these forms of
despair depression anxiety addiction
they are meaningful signals right they
are telling us something the fact that
they have been rising year after year
after year that we're now at the point
where average white male life expectancy
has fallen in this country for the first
time in the entire peacetime history of
the United States that is a signal that
is telling us something and that's
because of drug addiction and and
overwhelming because of drug addiction
and suicide it's risen to that point
there other factors going on like
obesity but that the main drivers are
overdosing suicide and now he's telling
us something what we've been doing up to
now is we've been insulting that signal
we've either been saying depress people
addicted people are just weak all we've
been saying oh it's just a problem in
their brain that there are real things
going on in their brains of course all
we've been saying you know it's just
craziness and but in fact it is largely
a response to the way we're living of
course there are other things going on
as well and we can talk about them and
once you understand that you realize
there's got to be a deeper response and
I went to places that I've done that not
just whistling Switzerland what is the
lower the overall population
five and a half million so it's a small
compared a small country yeah how much
money do they have to spend to keep this
program going and what is the time
constraint in terms of like how long is
a person who's got an addiction problem
allowed to stay there and and receive
treatment
there's no time constraint you can stay
on your entire life if you want to in
practice that doesn't happen bro they
stay in the facility no no they live in
apartments okay they just they just go
every day or whenever they want to I
mean I think you can go twice a day and
it's free it's free it doesn't cost
anything I mean some people once they
have jobs then pay health insurance and
the health insurance pays forever but if
you don't have money then they pay for
it
and and one things that was fascinating
is they found it wasn't and Joanne set
did good research on all sites good
research on this for she did research
the open society foundation it's
actually cheaper then the police
constantly harassing people putting them
in prison putting them on trial those
are really expensive things to do heroin
is unbelievably cheap if you buy it
legally right I would think did the
amount of money they would save just in
street crime being radically reduced
exactly it makes it makes the life of
the person with addiction better it
makes the life of ordinary of other
citizens who were not addicted better
and it saves money right which is why
Swiss people were very pragmatic they're
not you know the most compassionate
people but they are very pragmatic
people that's why it was so popular so
let's think about another place that
adopted really different drug policies
right because I think it's some we can
learn from there as well so Portugal
around the time Switzerland's having its
horrific heroin crisis Portugal is
having a fucking nightmare right by the
year 2000 one percent of the population
was addicted to heroin which is
incredible right and every year they
would like switch then they were trying
the American Way shame punishment stigma
and things just kept getting worse and
worse and worse and then one day the
Prime Minister and the leader of the
Opposition got together and they're like
oh we can't go on like this what are we
gonna what are we gonna do and they
decided to do something really radical
something no one had done since the drug
war began in this country seventy years
before they said should we like ask some
scientists what the best thing to do
would be so they set up a panel of
scientists and doctors led by an amazing
man I got to know in Portugal doctor hua
ji Lao a totally strongly person and and
he'd run the first of a drug treatment
center in in Portugal bounded after the
dictatorship and they said to them you
guys just go away look at all the
evidence and figure out what the hell we
can do so they go away for two years
they learn about rat Park they learn
loads of things and they come back and
they say okay
a solution is we want to decriminalize
all drugs from cannabis to crack but and
this is the crucial next step take all
the money we currently spend on fucking
people up arresting them shaming them
imprisoning them and spend all that
money instead on turning their lives
around
and interestingly it's not really what
we think of as drug treatment here in
the United States right so they do some
residential rehab that has some value
main thing they did was a big program of
job creation for people with addiction
problems saying you used to be a
mechanic they'd go to a garage and they
said if you employed this guy for a year
we'll pay half his wages again much
cheaper than sending him to prison right
they set up a big program of small loans
so people with addiction problems could
set up and run businesses the things
they thought were important at the time
people like this is crazy they're just
going to spend it all on drugs lunacy
and by the time I went to Portugal it
was again 13 years since it began and
the results were in addiction was down
by 50% oh and there's by the figures of
in the British Journal of Criminology
the best scientific study of this and
overdose deaths were massively down HIV
was massively down every single
indicator on problems related to drug
use had fallen like a cliff right it
wasn't perfect they still got problems
of course but there was a massive
improvement and one of the reasons you
know it works so well is that virtually
no one in Portugal wants to go back I
went and interviewed a great guy called
Quayle figueira who at the time of the
decriminalization was the top drug cop
in the whole country and he said what
I'm sure those your listeners are
thinking right at the time which was
like if we decriminalized all drugs we
can have an explosion in drug use we can
have loads of kids using there's like a
nightmare we can't do this and when I
went to see him the audios on the
tasting scream website he said saying
like everything I said would happen
didn't happen and everything the other
side said would happen did and he talked
about how he felt really ashamed that
he'd spent so many years prior to the
decriminalization screwing people's
lives up when he could have been helping
them turn their lives around and and
this is something that I saw all over
the world right the places that have
drug policies based on shame and stigma
and the fantasy that you can get rid of
drug use which you can never do they
have massive really terrible and rising
problems the places that have policies
based on okay let's restore order to the
market and let's give lot liberty to
drug users and love and compassion and
practical help for people with addiction
problems have declining drug problems
right again not perfect but it
such a significant improvement there's
support in Portugal I mean they've got
five main political parties none of them
want to go back right that tells you
something right yeah now when they did
this in Switzerland what was the primary
cause for this drug addiction and how
did they deal with that so if they dealt
with it in Portugal with these loans and
and and and helping out businesses by
paying for half of salary and all those
things like that seemed like wonderful
ideas what do they do in Switzerland to
sort of mitigate what are the issues
whatever the issues were they were
causing people to be drug addicts in the
first place so as a combination they
gave people lots of therapy so I
remember one of the people I spent some
time with in that clinic had been
terribly sexually abused there's a lot
of evidence that giving survivors of
sexual abuse safe places in which they
can release their shame about that leads
to a big fall in depression addiction
and other problems it's a lot of
evidence that that kind of abuse is is
it's a big driver of a lot of addiction
for a lot of people though clearly not
everyone some of it was just there were
people who had never been given a chance
in life or I had never had stable lives
it was kind of a mixture of things and
and one of the things that's really good
about the Swiss system is it wasn't
saying in this kind of cookie cutter way
that up and half often happens in drug
treatment in the United States or
there's plenty of good examples as well
you know you don't arrive and they say
this is your problem we're here to tell
you your problem and how to solve your
problem it's very much guided by
actually the person themselves right
people who are in deep pain the the core
of its you have to listen to them right
if we think about this addiction
depression in the way that I'm arguing
that we should see them as signals that
are telling us something most important
thing is to listen to the signal right I
remember that saying I thought about a
lot at this weird experience that I kept
thinking about all the time I was
writing my book lost connections about
to press him and it sounded quite light
in the late in the day that I realized
why I kept thinking about it so much I
was in Vietnam about five years ago now
maybe a little bit less and and I did
this really stupid thing I was I was in
Hanoi and I was really tired I was doing
research for a different book that
haven't finished yet and by the side of
the road I saw this big red apple woman
selling it and I'm shit haggling so I
paid like $5.00 for this Apple or
something about and I take it back to my
hotel
I'm so tired I lay on the bed
and I start eating and it was just gross
right it was some really it's chemical
taste it was like how I imagined food
would taste after a nuclear war when I
used to watch those films in the 80s
right I was so tired even though I knew
it was wrong I ate like half of it and
threw it in the garbage and next like
four days I was just like violently sick
right like just in it like something
from The Exorcist right so I'm lying
there in front of CNN and occasionally
projectile vomiting and it gets flight
forward I'd had food poisoning before I
basically lived on fried chicken in my
20s so it was not new to this rodeo and
after about four days I said to Hawaiian
my fixer and translator who was
arranging I was there to interview
survivors at the war the Vietnam War for
something I'm like look I'm only here
for another three days or whatever it
was I've got to go meet these people
always whole trip would've been a waste
of time so he drives me like six or
seven hours into the countryside and we
get there and he's lined up these people
for me to interview oh my god I think I
feel so bad actually I sitting in this
heart with this this woman there's an
86-year woman who was the only person
from her village that survived the
Vietnam War so I'm talking to her and as
she's speaking that the room starts -
I've never had this feeling before and
I've had a thing when you're a drunk
when you feel the rooms move it it
literally felt like the room was moving
around me like like I didn't feel like I
was disorientated and then while she's
talking I just like explode all over her
heart from both Ed's like fucking Horror
Show right and so I say to her just just
take me back to put me in the car take
me back to Hanoi right and he's this old
woman's like saying send to him and I'm
just like lying there and he says she
says you've got to go to the hospital we
were really sick and I'm like no no I
just need to go back to the hotel and he
said yeah and this is the only woman who
survived the Vietnam War in this village
I'm gonna listen to her health advice
over yours we're going to the hospital
so we go to this hospital where I'm
pretty sure I was the only European I've
been treated they take me in and krang's
like completely lying going like this is
an important West that I it will
disgrace Vietnam if he dies here right
and so I'm lying there and they like
jabbing me with everything and I'm like
what's going on and they're asking me
lots of questions and I thought the most
nausea so I've ever felt right and I
kept saying to them give me something
for the nausea through Hawaiian commit
it speaking English
and the doctor said to me you need your
nausea it will tell us what's wrong with
you right now even line though I think
it was kind of interesting so everything
line there and thinking they figured out
was the Apple and I'm having such a
ridiculous thought where I thought I'm
about to die
I've been killed by an apple I'm like
Eve or like Snow White or like Alan
Turing and then I was like you're about
to die in your last thoughts that you're
basically a pretentious country
horrified by myself anyway they gave me
all his treatment and a few days later
when I leave I'm talking to the doctor
and I just discuss embrace things with
him and I said to him what would have
happened if I'd um if I had gone back to
hello if he'd written me about ten or
and he said oh well what happened is my
kidneys has stopped working hadn't kept
any water in for four days she was like
I had been in the desert for four days
and the doctor said oh you would've died
on the journey when I made it and so I
can't think about this experience which
weirdly didn't actually affect my like
worldview were anything's the closest
I've ever had to a near-death experience
but all through researching my book
about depression loss connections I kept
thinking about this thing right you need
your nausea it will tell us what's wrong
with you and I realized all the time I
had been depressed if I think about my
relatives and people I loved who had
addiction problems I had seen that my
depression their addiction as a bit like
that nausea right as like a kind of
malfunction right saying that you should
get rid of and actually what we need to
do is hear it right because it will tell
us what's wrong with us right doesn't
mean it's a good feeling it's awful
right depressions worst thing I've ever
felt addiction is a terrible state to be
in it's not saying just in some kind of
you know where are we just to put up
with it it's that if we hear the signal
we can begin to find solutions and all
the places I went the places that I've
solved depression crises that I went to
for lost connections places that solved
addiction crises that I went to for
chasing the screen our places that have
said actually this means something right
your pain makes sense you feel these
ways for reasons and we need to get down
into these these deeper reasons which is
really not what we've done in the United
States since the drug war began you know
a century ago so did they figure out in
Switzerland what was causing this rash
of addiction and just by treating it
seems like if there is some underlying
condition
that's causing this depression that's
leading people to drug addiction they're
just giving them free heroin it's not
gonna fix the root cause so how did they
find out what the root cause was and why
was such an epidemic you're totally
right that
so the Herot the heroin is does two
things so partly as you become addicted
you spiral into the people who don't
have huge private resources some people
do right as you become addicted what
happens to a lot of people is you spiral
into chaotic Street use right so for a
lot of women that means sex work for a
lot of men that means property crime
some men sex work as well but mostly not
and so what happens is actually you
become you know you develop an addiction
because you're dealing with this pain
but then you actually move into a much
more chaotic we're living right which
which causes deeper pain and deeper pain
obviously if you're being fucked by
strangers every day and treating you
badly you're gonna want to be even more
and ISTA tizen after that right or if
you're frightened that the police all
the time so what happens is that partly
what happened in Switzerland was giving
people the legal heroin ended the chaos
of street use which in itself was making
addiction worse that's clearly not the
cause because you don't start out as a
street user so it was partly that I
think it was partly attending to
people's deeper distress and it's not
like there's one cookie cutter thing
that was that was the answer it was
listening to different people at
different stages and and and looking at
they'd had some problems with
unemployment you don't want to overstate
that they'd have some problems with
child abuse you don't want to overstate
that it was more like a kind of menu of
things a most sophisticated menu of
things that but but but the thing that
they definitely showed in the Swiss
model and in Portugal and in lots of
other places I went to is compassionate
treatment reduces addiction right and
treatment understood in the broadest
sense because it reduces the pain the
individual is in anything that reduces
the shame stigma and humiliation will
over time reduce addiction for most
people not everyone some people are in
such internal agony they will always
need anesthetics and this I think is a
really important point and one that can
be quite challenging to some people
including people like me who have people
they love with addiction problems so
where I open chasing the Screamers with
this story
I think a lot of people think why the
fuck is a book about the war on drugs
starting like this and I think it tells
you so much
so in 1939 in a hotel in midtown
Manhattan Billie Holiday the great jazz
singer walked on stage as she sang for
the first time a song that I'm sure all
your listeners and viewers have heard
it's a song called strange fruit right
it's a song against lynching it's the
idea that in the south the bodies of
African American men hang from the trees
and they're like a kind of strange fruit
in the south right this is unbelievably
challenging at that time there are very
few popular songs like that and and to
have an african-american woman doing it
was quite shocking where she wasn't even
allowed to walk through the front door
of that hotel they made her go through
the service elevator she was African
American and that night Billie Holiday
gets a warning from a man called Harry
Anslinger from the agents of a man
called Harry Anslinger that basically
says stop singing this song right wait
what's this got to do with the war on
drugs so Harry Anslinger is a man it was
government bureaucrat I think the most
influential person no one's ever heard
of he's affected the lives of loads of
people listening to your show it's Harry
Anslinger as a government bureaucrat who
takes over the department of prohibition
just as alcohol prohibition is ending so
you've had this big war on alcohol it's
been a shit show it's been a disaster
and he takes it over and he wants to
keep his government department going and
he invents the modern war on drugs is
the first person to ever use the phrase
war on drugs and and he really builds
this war on drugs around to intense
hatred she has and Billie Holiday's the
personification of both one was a really
intense hatred of african-americans I
mean he was regarded as a crazy racist
in the 1920s which gives you a sense of
how racist he was he used the n-word so
often in official memos his own senator
said he should have to resign that's how
hardcore he was right and he also had an
intense hatred of people with addiction
problems and Billie Holiday she'd grown
up on the streets of Baltimore a part of
Baltimore called pig town when she was
10 she was horrific she was raped the
man who raped her was sent to prison for
a year and a half she was sent
Reformatory for longer than he got right
she
she was tormented by the nuns there they
they said she was disobedient she
brought it on herself
they still lock her in with dead bodies
overnight to teach her a lesson she
eventually ran away she tried to find
her mother her mother had gone to what's
now called Roosevelt Island now it
wasn't called that then where she was
working as a prostitute and Billie
Holiday starts kind of working in
inverted commas next to her mother in
this brothel from when she's like 14 so
she's being raped by men for money night
after night after night she's you know
and when they the police rescue rescue
break into the brothel they arrest her
right and said it to prison
so Billie Holiday is trying to numb the
grief and pain that comes from that
right so she starts out using loads of
alcohol and then she's using loads of
other stuff as well mostly heroin and
when she gets this warning from Harry
Anslinger saying stop singing this song
Billie Holiday's attitude is fuck you
I'm an American citizen I'll sing what I
fuckin please right and at that point
Harry Anslinger resolves to destroy her
the first man he sent to to track her is
a man called follow her round his guy
called Jimmy Fletcher Harry Anslinger
hated employing white people sorry hated
employing African Americans but you
couldn't really send a white person into
Harlem to follow Billie Holiday for it'd
be kind of obvious
so employed this african-american guy
called Jimmy Fletcher whose job type was
a bagman he was given the job followed
Billie Holiday everywhere she goes
befriend her document her drug use right
he dances with her in nightclubs he gets
to know her really well and Billie
Holiday was so amazing that Jimmy
Fletcher fell in love with her and his
whole life he felt really ashamed of
what he did he busts her they when they
come in to search her she makes him she
pisses in front of him and says you can
look in my pussy you can see I don't
have anything here and she's put on
trial the trial was called the United
States versus Billie Holiday and she
said that's how it fucking felt she sent
to prison for 18 months she doesn't say
a word in prison
but what happened to her next I think is
the cruelest thing she gets out of
prison and and at that time to sing
anywhere where they served alcohol you
needed what was called a cabaret
performers license Anslinger makes sure
she doesn't get it so one of her friends
Yolanda Pavan is also a great jazz
singer
said to me what's the cruelest thing you
can do to a person is to take away the
thing they love right they take away
singing from Billie Holiday so we do to
people with addiction problems all over
the United States right we give them
criminal records that make it much
harder to do the things that are
meaningful to them by work for example
um so in that situation obviously Billie
Holiday relapses right she starts using
a shit ton of heroin again one day in
the early 50s she collapses not far from
where she'd first sung strange fruit the
first hospital won't even take her
because they she's got an addiction
problem this and we're not having her
second hospital takes her but she says
to her friend Mae Lee Duff T on the way
in the Anslinger's men weren't done with
her they were gonna come fair she said
they're gonna kill me in there
don't let them they're gonna kill me she
wasn't wrong so in the hospital she's
diagnosed with advanced liver cancer
probably related to her severe
alcoholism and in the hospital she she
goes into heroin withdrawal so Mei Lee
her friend manages to insist that she's
given methadone and she starts to
recover a bit because her McGraw is
quite dangerous when you're weak rather
when you're old weave and sling as men
come they arrest her on her hospital bed
they handcuff her to the hospital but I
tend to be the last person he was still
alive you've been in that rumor
a man called Reverend Eugene calendar
been a religious minister they
handcuffed her to a hospital bed they
don't know have friends in to see her
they don't even have candies outside
Reverend calendar led protests with
signs saying let Lady Day live there
were big protests they knew they were
killing her right then after ten days
they cut off the methadone er she'd died
the next day her friend one of her
friends told the BBC that she looked
like she had been violently wrenched
from life right there's loads of things
about this story which be made into a
movie and Lee Daniels is directing it
but there's so many things about this
story that tell us what this war on
drugs is about right firstly it's about
in its effect
it's about shaming addicts and this
effect as it makes addicts worse right
he said with Billie Holiday see that
everywhere secondly it's been insanely
racist from the start right at the same
time the Harry Anslinger found out
Billie Holiday had a heroin addict
he found out Judy Garland Dorothy from
The Wizard of Oz had a heroin addiction
to make changes he watched The Wizard of
Oz when you know that um and he went to
the studio and he advised he said to
Judy Garland into the studio she should
take longer vacations right spot the
difference with a white woman Judy
Garland longer vacations with Billie
Holiday fucking destroy her right in
fact one of the agents he sent to
destroy her a man called George white
who's going after in the last days of
her life we now know I mean he's a
literally a psychopath he was a hugely
obese guy was a strange guy he
infiltrated a Chinese drug gang when he
wasn't training in a person to ever do
that but he he boasted in his diary
about murdering people about spiking
women and raping them I mean these were
really deranged people that were that
founded the the the drug war but the
reason I set in relation to what we were
just talking about is because in this
culture we tell only one heroic story
about people with addiction problems and
that's that they sometimes recover from
their addiction that is indeed a heroic
story everyone watching this who's been
who's managed to do that is a hero and I
massively loved and congratulated them
but that is not the only heroic story we
should tell about people with addiction
problems Billie Holiday never stopped
using drugs she was still a fucking hero
she Amy she never let these people stop
her singing that song she would go to
the places where you didn't have a
license she'll go to the worst parts of
the deep south she sang strange fruit
they people threw bottles at her they
stubbed out cigarettes on her she never
stopped singing that song right and I
think about Billie Holiday a lot and I
think about you know all over the world
every day people listen to Billie
Holiday and they feel stronger and all
over the world every day we are still
following the policies of Harry
Anslinger and it makes us a weaker and
this conflict that begins right at the
start of the drug and I think if I'm
honest I think this isn't an easy thing
to say but I think one of the reasons
why the debate about the drug war is so
charged is because it runs through the
hearts of all of us right anyone who's
got someone they love who's got an
addiction problem as I do there's a
Harry Anslinger in your head right
there's a bit of you that looks at them
and thinks so much you're just fucking
why are you doing this someone should
stop you doing this and then for most
people there's another part that's like
okay that anger isn't useful in most
cases actually what you're doing this
for a reason we need to understand those
reasons we need to help you to change
your life right but that conflict is
very deep in us and Harry Anslinger the
war he invented and we can talk about
what he did with cannabis and loads of
other things but because he invented the
ban on cannabis that wars is still
playing it does that makes sense I know
that was a long answer but sorry no it
does make sense and it's a horrific
story about Billie Holiday and I had no
idea that Dorothy from The Wizard of Oz
was also addicted munchkins a lot of
them as well um now Harry why was Harry
Anslinger's hate towards her so extreme
so when he was a kid the book is called
chasing the screen because when he was a
kid he grew up in a place called Altoona
in Pennsylvania and he he lived in a
farmhouse his dad was actually a refugee
from Sabang refugee in a bit comes
immigrant from Switzerland and they grew
up in this farmhouse and in the next
farmhouse down there was a a farmer's
wife who had in a heron addiction or a
method of sorry morphine addiction
would've been her in them and haryana
staying had this really haunting memory
of going to that house and hearing this
woman scream and scream and him being
sent to take the horse and cart that he
was 11 or something being sent to take
the horse and cart into town to go to
the pharmacy to get her the morphine and
then bringing it back and her scream
stopping but lesson he took from that is
these drugs that evil and we need to
destroy them especially later on he was
in Europe during the First World War and
he had this very Keynes he was a
diplomat I mean this very keen sense the
civilization was incredibly fragile it
could collapse at any moment that you
only need a little bit of contamination
and it will all go to shit and and so he
yeah I call it chasing the screen
because I think in a way what Harry nice
things doing is like chasing this scream
all over the world and I felt like what
I was doing going to all these different
places when the killing fields in Mexico
to Portugal and Switzerland was like
following this scream as it kind of Rick
shade around and actually how he made he
thinks he's stopping these screams he's
actually creating far more screams in
their in their in their place yeah but
I'd still understand why he had this
silly holiday yes so well she's an
african-american woman standing up to
white supremacy who has an addiction
problem but the truth is what he did to
Billie Holiday is not pretty it's not
this is weighted to African Americans
and to people with addiction problems
Billie Holiday's happens to be famous so
I'm telling her story but this is what
he did to huge numbers of people right
he wanted to destroy the whole jazz
scene that what an amazing thing is
spending time in his archives in Penn
State was seeing all these memos from
his agent so he said to them go to your
local jazz club document the evil things
that happening there and the things they
wrote back I cut it hilarious right
there's one agent who I forget where it
was but he he wrote back ends like him
there was a popular jazz song at the
time called that ocean man and had a
lyric that said when he gets the notion
he thinks he can walk across the ocean
and he's like there is gonna be an
epidemic of drowning across the United
States as people use cannabis because
they're going to believe they can walk
on water so he would he was a literally
the hilarious we were things he said you
know he believed that when you smoked
cannabis time slows down so a minute
seems to last a thousand years like
these extraordinarily heightened crazy
things that he would he would say and he
actually latched so at that time when he
first takes over what becomes the
Federal Bureau of Narcotics you know
cocaine and heroin just aren't very
popular right there's just not much of a
war to fight
I mean they exist but they're not that
popular quite that confined to small
urban scenes cannabis was more popular
not as popular as it is now but and and
he had previously said cannabis isn't
harmful not bothered about it
suddenly when he Cotton's on that this
is the way to big build up his
department he announces that cannabis is
the phrase use was the most evil drug in
the world
he said when Frankenstein's monster
bumps into a spliff on the staircase
Frankenstein's monster dies of fright
like these extraordinarily heightened
claims and and any any issue starts
trying to get support for a ban on
cannabis and he latches on to one case
in particular as important cuz I think
we're hearing these to get these things
now so a kid in Tampa Florida called
Victor like Arthur he was not so much a
kid 21 killed his entire family with an
axe but should them all and with the
help of the Fox News of its time Hurston
Hearst Newspapers Anslinger announces
this is what will happen if you use
cannabis literally you will kill your
family with an axe right and this
becomes a very famous story across the
United States and cannabis is banned in
its wake
years later someone goes and checks the
psychiatric files but Victor laconic
wasn't even evidence it'll use cannabis
right he had terrible problems with
psychosis his family had been advised
more than a year before that he should
be institutionalized and they refused
they kept him at home and this tragedy
ensued we're hearing these these scare
stories again about about cannabis
there's something that Ann sling has
said but I think could be like the motto
for the entire drug war in the wake of
the so Anslinger introduces this ban in
the US he promises drugs will disappear
right you will notice drugs did not
disappear he starts to say well that's
just because evil foreign countries like
Mexico are flooding our country with
drugs you'll notice that's come back as
well so what we need to do is force all
these other countries to ban them as
well and then they'll disappear so the
US in the wake of the second world war
really has the power to do that world is
in ruins and there's one player when he
goes to the new United Nations and he's
insisting this happens and they're
basically threatening people they're
saying it will cut off your foreign aid
or you won't be allowed to sell goods to
the US market if you don't do this the
Ambassador from Thailand is like oh you
know it doesn't seem to work very well
in your country we've actually got a
long pattern of established drug use in
in Thailand we don't really have many
problems we don't want to do this and
hands thing I said to her I said to him
I've made up my mind don't try to
confuse me with the facts and I always
feel like that's the drug war right and
I made up my mind don't try to confuse
me with the facts well he in conjunction
with William Randolph Hearst he worked
with him to try to propagate these
ridiculous propaganda stories about
Mexicans and blacks smoking this evil
drug called marijuana which is really
not even a real term for cannabis at the
time it was a sadist wild yeah it was a
wild Mexican tobacco right
yeah but then didn't Nixon do a similar
thing with the sweeping psychedelic tact
of 1970 he did it so that they could
infiltrate the civil rights movement
because there were so many people in the
civil rights movement that were using
various psychedelic drugs they could use
it as an excuse to crack down on them
and lock them up and put them in jail
and pit them against each other and you
know have them inform on each other yeah
this is really important you cannot
enforce the drug laws against everyone
who's broken them is impossible half of
all Americans by conservative estimate
have broken the drug laws right so what
do you do everywhere in the world
the drug laws are used to persecute
groups the state wants to persecute
there are other reasons right yeah so
when one of the people I write back in
in chasing scream is it a woman who
really had a kind of epiphany about this
right so Lee Maddox was a cop in
Baltimore she used to do the i-95 she
would and she would very proudly bust
people who even had a single joint right
she was a real Harry Anslinger dream
girl she had signed up to become a cop
which it amazing very interesting
personally she'd signed up to come a cop
for quite personal reason as a kid she'd
had a best friend kiddin teenager called
Alisa who was like they looked really
similar they shared a fake ID they were
like sisters and one day when they were
in their late teens they went to Ocean
City for a day out and Alisa decided to
hitchhike back to New Jersey where she
lived and so Lee said bye to her and the
next day she gets a call saying Lisa had
not arrived so she waits and waits just
this terrible summer waiting to find out
what happened and then they discovered
that Lisa had been gang raped and
murdered her body was found underneath
her house what had been eaten by animals
and Lee becomes became convinced at that
time that that Lisa for spurious reasons
that Lisa had been killed as part of a
gang initiation ceremony she likes like
I'm gonna destroy these gangs gonna
dedicate my life to destroying these
gangs she goes and applies to become a
police officer and for years she's this
you know hard-line cop right takes real
pleasure in busting people but Lee
started to notice a few things first
thing was and when you're a cop and you
arrest a rapist there are fewer rapes in
your town
the next week right when you are cop and
you bust a pedophile fewer children get
sexually abused but she knows when you
drop Buster dealer there's no if you
were dealers there's someone on the
corner the next day for sure right it
didn't seem to be having any effect in
fact what she discovered was she began
to learn about this was that there was
something even worse which was finally
sort reason that she realized that she
was actually creating these empowering
these gangs so the best way to explain
this is if you imagine obviously when
you when you ban drugs they don't
disappear right that transfer from the
people who used to control them licensed
illegal businesses to armed criminal
gangs right and these armed criminal
gangs operate in a different way to
illegal businesses if you imagine if you
and me decided we want to go and steal
now a bottle of vodka right we go into
local liquor store and that store
catches us they'll call the cops the
cops will come and take us away that
liquor store doesn't need to be violent
it doesn't need to be intimidating
they've got the power of the law to
uphold their property rights okay now
imagine we wanted to steal a bag of coke
right if we go to the guy near here I'm
sure there is someone who sells coke and
and he catches us he can't call the cops
obviously cops would arrest him he has
to fight us now if you're a dealer you
don't want to be having a fight every
day right you want to establish a
reputation for being so frightening that
no one will dare to fuck with you right
so you establish your place in that
neighborhood through aggression through
violence and you maintain it through
aggression and violence right legal
businesses compete on cost and quality
of product in illegal markets people
compete on how much of a frightening
fucker you're prepared to be right and
as a writer called Charles bad and put
it and the war on drugs creates a war
for drugs right it transfers it to these
criminal gangs who have to operate
through violence to protect their
property rights so link goes in to the
drug war thinking I'm the one stopping
these gangs she realizes I'm the one
enabling them right they control one of
the biggest industries in the world
because of this police action and
because of this decision to prohibit
these drugs and if you want to know how
much of this violence is caused by I am
by the fact that we've prohibited it
just ask yourself where are the violent
alcohol dealers right
everyone knows who Al Capone was just
the head of Smirnoff go and shoot the
head of Budweiser in the face right does
your local bar go and send a bunch of
kids to go and shoot everyone in the
next bar down of course not
exactly that happened under alcohol
prohibition when did it end it ended on
the day alcohol prohibition ended
because legal markets don't compete than
that so at least partly having this
insight right she's realizing shit I
think I'm taking down these gangs I'm
actually empowering them what will
really disempower them is reclaiming the
market and making it legal but she also
has another really painful realization
so early in her career as a cop Lee had
done this really brave thing she'd gone
undercover with the Klan to expose them
she'd done a really important work in
breaking up parts of the Maryland clam
she really was not a racist right she'd
had versatile african-american men
machine that is something that most
honest cops notice which is the vast
majority of people they were sent to
african-american areas to enforce the
drug laws right one of her colleagues
Matthew Fogg once went to his superior
officer
and said you know it's a bit weird right
we only ever seem to go to
african-american neighborhoods to do all
our drug busts I'm fairly sure white
people sometimes use drugs shall we go
to like a white neighborhood as well and
the supervisor said of course you're
right white people use drugs but white
people know journalists and lawyers and
judges that's really we that's just get
a whole load of shit for us just go for
the low-hanging fruit so Lee who is not
a racist
could see the effect of what she was
doing was in fact racist right and she
was very uncomfortable with that and
this really came to a head believed when
Lee's police partner was guy called Edie
totally who she loved platonically loved
and he was a great champion of women
police officers he was a great guy and
one day she gets a call at home ed had
been sent on a drug bust he was
undercover and the guy had thought it
was ripping him off and shot him in the
head and Lee goes to see Ed's body and
she's like what did he die for right
there are no fewer drug dealers every
time we arrest a drug dealer the supply
of drugs is not disrupted for one hour
we are enforcing a racist war we are
empowering these gangs why are we doing
this
soli quit as a police officer she
retrained as a lawyer she now gets the
criminal records expunged wherever she
can of the kind of people that she
busted when she was a cop and she's a
big she was part of a brilliant group
called Law Enforcement Against
Prohibition who were cops who argue for
for ending the drug war but essentially
to me because it's hard to be Harriet
Lee was trying to be Harry Anslinger
it's hard to be Harry Anslinger if
you're an honest person with a
conscience
right and there are police officers all
over the country who are making these
these realizations now and that you know
obviously it's very close to my heart
what we do to people with addiction
problems
I don't horrific in catastrophic though
that is I don't actually think that's
the biggest moral issue around the war
on drugs the biggest moral issue is the
violence created by prohibition right if
I think about places I've spent time
like Columbia sidled Horrors in northern
Mexico that's the biggest issue right
more people have died in in Latin
America Central and South America in the
drug war violence than have died in
Syria I don't know what we can do about
Syria we can end this violence there's
professor at Harvard called Jeffrey
Myron been trying to beat has a graph of
the murder rate in the 20th century in
the United States massively shoots up
the day alcohol is banned and falls like
a stone the day alcohol is legalized
right and massively rises again when
there's an intensification of the drug
war later and we can end a huge amount
of this violence right we can do what
Switzerland did we can do what was
happening so what's stopping us so I
think the main thing this is because
this is a logical conclusion based on
facts and based on cases like Portugal
and Switzerland
there's obviously data so people are
aware of this so people must be
confronted with this data to this day
people know that the prohibition on
alcohol was a massive disaster and no
one would ever accept it again we're
slowly starting to realize that
marijuana at least for some people is is
safe and reasonable and should be used
recreationally and has some massive
benefits medically so we're starting to
see legalization both for recreational
use and clearly for medical uses spread
I think we did we decide what
was it I think it's like there's a
certain amount of states where it's just
fully legal recreationally and more
where it's medical but I think it's more
than eighteen states total soon we're
gonna be half of the American population
should be a hundred percent right I mean
we all is in Canada and it should be yes
it is in Canada as it should be for
alcohol but what what is the stop what
is the wall between this and
legalization of all these other drugs
and counseling and implementing some
sort of a Switzerland like program I
think on to the really important
question so there's a range of things
this is all public perception a big one
I think you've gone to the most
important right so some people say it's
the vested financial interest in the
existing system that's true if you look
at who funds the no campaigns whenever
they want to legalize marijuana you can
see the interests right prison guard
unions alcohol companies because they
don't want a commercial competitor and
religious fundamentalist groups like
Mormons not all Mormons fundamentalist
but the groups that funding this are and
so it's partly that but I think you're
right I don't think that's the main
thing that's going on it's it's
significant and real but it's the main
thing that's going on the main thing the
main block is huge majorities of
Americans more than 80 percent said the
war on drugs has failed and been a
disaster and yet most people are afraid
of the alternatives right and that's
part as having as two things going on
there's ignorance about what the
alternatives actually mean so really one
of the reasons why Jason scream is
written as I went to all these places
from the killing fields in northern
Mexico to Switzerland is because way too
often in this debate we talk like we're
a philosophy seminar people go or what
would legalization mean how would it
work and they go to this weird abstract
conversation like fuck that here's a
plane ticket to Geneva
he's a plane ticket to Lisbon he's a
plane ticket to Colorado right it's not
rocket science right I've been to the
places that have tried these things we
can see the results right then they're
not legalization is not a poor dick
remand decriminalization I can explain
the difference if you want are not
abstract and what are their words the
key differences between legalization and
decriminalization is where you stop
punishing users but they still have to
go to armed criminal gangs to get their
drug legalization is where you open up
legal route for people to get their
drugs and that's varies according to the
drug right so I guess the kind of
headline would be decriminalization
shuts down orange is the new black and
legalization shuts down Breaking Bad and
narcos right and of course we need to
debate throughout me to decriminalize
use and legalize City Mexico
decriminalize a lot of drugs like fairly
recently yes they had a big Supreme
Court decision I spent a lot of time in
Mexico and I you know I think about I
think about this time I spent in Mexico
really often because it was I'm gonna
cover you know been to a lot of bad
places I covered the war in the Congo
I've been to Iraq I've been to Gaza I've
never seen anything like what happened
in Juarez when when I was there the you
know I think it's worth explaining so
when you like I was saying when you ban
drugs that it disappear right the
transfer to armed criminal gangs if you
live in a housing project in the United
States where five percent of the economy
of that housing project is in the hands
of armed criminal gangs that's gonna be
a shitty frightening place to be right
place like ciudad horrors which is on
the border with mexican side of the
united states border with them is the
other side with our paso and by the time
i went there it was seventy percent
seven zero percent of the economy was in
the hands of these armed criminal gangs
right so i remember going to see this
guy ross sali Retta interview people
about him in horace but then I went to
he's in prison in the United States is
in Tyler County and Rosario is an
interesting guy see but should all be
headed about seventy people between ages
of 13 and 17 I'm going into the prison
actually to see him and the guard said
to me on the way in but obviously I
can't leave you alone with him because
he's like but should all these people I
was like are great things and I never
heard about five but it said Tyrone
Garber's fucking god but I'm sitting
with Rosario talking about his life and
his his story so Rosario grew up in
Laredo Texas side of the board is
basically the same place there's no way
of a Laredo on the on the Mexican side
it was very easy to cross the border at
that time secret who's growing up in the
late nineties naughties remember Sally I
was 13 so loads get the Zetas were kind
of famous drug gang
that time they still are good drug
cartel how the Zetas were created it's
an insane story every taxpayer should
know the US government decided to train
an elite anti-drug force for the for the
Mexican government right like kind of
Navy SEALs for the anti-drug force they
take them to Fort Bragg they spent
something like 250 million dollars
training them up they got back to Mexico
six months later they all defected on
mass almost all of them
I created a drug cartel the Zetas great
you see your tax money so the satyrs
were this kind of glamorous in inverted
commas drug gang right operating on that
part the border drug routes move around
according to where they put policing it
always gets through but it moves a route
they call it the balloon effect imagine
a balloon half full of a pushdown one
paste the air comes up somewhere else
but at that time it was going through
lunar Juarez and El Paso and Laredo and
Nuevo Laredo and Rosario says two
stories about how Rosario gets involved
with a Zeta is what Rosario says is he
was basically kidnapped by them and
forced to start killing people I don't
think that's true if you look at the
evidence it's that he sort of
volunteered but he's 13 so I don't hold
him morally responsible for that but
either way there's one night it all
begins he's taken on the Mexican side of
the border to a warehouse where they are
torturing people burning them alive he's
given a gun by a guy called Miguel
Trevino who later became the head of the
Zetas and he's told to shoot someone in
the head and that's the moment you're in
and when you're in with the Zetas you'll
never get out right there no one leaves
no one leaves alive
and so they begin to train him he sent
to us in 2005 he sent to a summer camp
that's a literally account but the
teachers you had to behead people and do
all sorts of things and he's then sent
him and his friends are then sent to
murder people
his with friends Jesse and Gabriel they
murder huge time school that they were
called within the the Zetas call these
child soldiers the Expendables because
there give a shit if they live or die
right there they this one person said to
me
they prefer children because they don't
understand death so well right I was the
solid got a bit older he understood
death better all his friends get
murdered
eventually he tries to get back to the
US he cooperates he now lives in
solitary confinement where he will live
but the rest of his life because when
they let him out of solitary surely
before
at him he was immediately stabbed in the
neck and again you think about this
insane violence that we created right
when I went to wise it's it's this
bizarre thing so at that time it wasn't
you were told it wasn't quite rightly it
wasn't safe to stay in horror as
overnight so I would stay overnight in
El Paso and I'd walk across the bridge
right through 3 or show Passport
however the customs people going what
the fuck are you going into Juarez but
go go in there it's weird on the other
side of the bridge there's this sign and
it says welcome to historic downtown
Juarez and it used to be a tourist site
Billie Holiday got married there but um
now it's just at that time it was just
covered with images of missing women
just everywhere because this is another
really important part of what this
violence doesn't think it's really
important we understand this is the
violence caused by the system that we
uphold and we imposed on Mexico Mexicans
do not want this right this is another
story I think this just of all the
stories I wrote about for chasing the
scream along with one other one I can
take back if you want this was the
hardest it's a woman in Juarez when the
drug war violence starts to go through
called Marisela Escobedo she was a nurse
but Marisa was incredibly hard-working
so she also would do these calm like
wood carvings basically and she would
sell them in the market on Saturdays and
Sundays she had three kids a youngest
daughter was called Ruby she was 14 at
the time and they would work on this
stall in the marketplace every Saturday
I think maybe even Sundays as well some
Sundays and one day a guy comes up to
Mary seller at her store called Sergio
he was a young guy he was like 21 and
he's like it had a baby he needs a job
Marisol I was kind of soft-hearted she
gives him a job working on her market
stall and a few months later she
discovers to her horror that he's having
sex with her fourteen-year-old daughter
Ruby and she's like fires him
immediately and goes to the police and
says you need to go and question him
right he's 21 she's 14 this is a crime
police don't do anything she doesn't
understand it what why are they not
investigating this her daughter starts
running away to be with with Sergio
Marisela keeps going to get it back she
keeps going to the police saying this is
a crime he can't live with the 14 year
old go and arrest and they would do
anything right she's completely puzzled
by this then Ruby gets pregnant
Marcela's like fish was 15 by then but
fuck I've got to keep her in my life so
she she keeps going to see Ruby by this
time she's kind of accepted the police
on with real rage that police aren't
going to do anything and one day just
after the baby was born she goes to see
Ruby and Sergio's there with the baby
and he says Oh Ruby's run away with
another man she's gone she's not coming
back
and Mary sellers like what I left her
baby no she hasn't done I know she
hasn't done that I know my daughter he's
like well she's gone so marisel awaits
christmas comes no message new year
comes no message she starts to go to the
neighborhood and hand out leaflets with
pictures of her daughter loads of women
are going missing in Horrors at this
time I say wait a minute just saying
have you seen this girl and after a few
days she gets a call from a kid called
and he'll who says I'm really frightened
to tell you something if you drive me
out into the desert I'll tell you
so she drives Anne Hale out into the
desert he was 14 and he says srgio
murdered your daughter Ernie made me
help him dispose of the body
and he told maricella where the body was
it was actually a place where they
dumped pig carcasses from the abattoir
so she goes and she finds the body with
it with her son and she goes to the
police and the police finally do
something in the arrest Sergio Sergio is
put on trial in the witness box he
breaks down admits he did it and
apologizes to Mary seller and then a few
weeks later he's acquitted of all
charges and disappears and Mary sellers
like what the fuck is going on here so
she starts to look into this and she
discovers and this is the work
intersects with the drug war in a really
important way that the Sergio was a
member of the Zetas right now if you're
a member of the Zetas at that time in
Juarez it's different acts and other
drug gangs displace them you own the
state right and you have if they can
trust seventy percent of the economy you
have more money than the government
right so the police work for them when I
went to going to be Rosario he said when
I would go murder people the police
would would come with me they would
dispose of the body right remember she's
great
year we're talking about this is like
six years ago I remember the the I
remember isn't it because one of things
when you're in a dangerous place when
you're when you're in a dangerous place
one of things you do is you read danger
from how frightened the people around
you are right because you don't know the
place I was I mean I was there with who
Leon Cardona who it was my fixer he's an
amazing
it's the Reuters course but a horse when
the bravest people I've ever met but it
was realizing how frightened other
people were for me and who Leon right
and remember after I've been there for a
few days
who Leon kept introducing me by that
time the killings were basically all
being done by the police and I was
saying you know who Leon this is this is
important that I meet people who've been
killed by the police but I should also
meet people who've been killed by the
cartels more recently and he said that
you just laughed and said no that's not
how works yeah now if the cartels want
to kill someone they just pay the police
to do it right so it's just real
realization alright if someone comes to
you there is nowhere for you to go right
so Marisela refuses to accept that she
lives in a country where there is no
justice she decides okay they're not
gonna solve this I'm gonna solve this
she appealed loads of women are missing
because it turns out if a bunch of
criminals control the state they will
just murder loads of women and get away
with it right there are some men who
just want to murder women and if they
give them license to do it they'll do it
that's why so many women were missing
Maurice Alec gathers a load of those
mothers she says some of them don't know
where their daughters are some of them
know their daughters are dead she's like
I need your help we're gonna find this
guy who's done this right so Marisela
turns herself with these women into a
detective
she starts tracking Sergio all over
Mexico wherever there are sightings
she walks everywhere she walks over a
thousand miles right
she walks through the desert it becomes
a media phenomenon people follow her
she's like this this symbol of the loss
that's happened in Mexico and incredibly
with their friend Berta Alyssia Garcia
who I got to know later after two years
she finds Sergio she tracks him down she
goes to the police she tells them where
he is they tip him off and he disappears
she's devastated so she decides she's
going to go to the governor's mansion in
Chihuahua
go to the State Capitol she goes there
and she sets up ten outside the
governor's mansion
she's like I'm not leaving here until
you people go and find this man and she
calls on every mother who has a daughter
who's missing or who they're afraid of
for to come and join her in this fight
right and it gets to Christmas Eve and
she's preparing to just before Christmas
on Christmas Eve I'm gonna have this big
Christmas dinner here people couldn't
join me she gives this great speech and
a man walks up turn shoots her in the
head in front of all the police everyone
and I thought a lot about maricella I
got to know her children who live here
in the United States now they got refuge
here what I think about the drug war and
what it does the first person I think of
after Billie Holiday's maricella
Escobedo right we have created an
enormous amount of violence that has
nothing to do with the drug right often
people hear this phrase drug-related
violence and what they picture when they
hear that is someone using drugs losing
their shit and attacking someone right
there's a really good study by Keuchel
professor Paul Goldstein that look to
everything that was classified as
drug-related violence in New York City
in 1986 what it found was 3 percent of
what's called drug-related violence is
someone using drugs and losing their
shit that's real it happens sometimes we
represent 3% another 7% was people with
an addiction problem like committing
property crimes and getting caught or
whatever and the vast majority was rival
drug gangs and exactly the kind of
violence we're talking about the war for
drugs created by prohibition now we can
reduce the problems associated with drug
use by having these adjust they have in
Switzerland a Portugal and and we can
end the violence caused by the war
photobooks there are no violent alcohol
gangs Al Capone killed loads of people
drunk no alcohol cellar anywhere in the
United States today will kill a single
other alcohol seller right that violence
ended if we banned rice there will be
violent rice sellers right that we have
to understand that what we are doing -
and there's this bullshit fucking thing
that said where they'll take these
deaths on the supply route right
prohibitionists and they'll say look at
you evil drug users you're responsible
for the deaths of these people right
that is so pernicious right you can have
every single drug piece of drug use that
happened in the United States today and
none of those killings on the supply
route it is the system those people have
erected and imposed and lied their way
to maintain that causes this violence
right and we can end this violence and I
think about the rosolio right the the
you know I got asked once in an
interview who do you feel most sorry for
of all the people you met and obviously
I met people with addiction problems all
over the world and I surprised myself
the person who came into my head was
Rosario because what have we done to
these people right what about snot we
for sure yeah well as taxpayers we're
responsible for it right I mean we don't
what you know you and I do not support
it but as a society we've done that and
those of us who oppose it haven't done a
good enough job of persuade anyone else
and it goes back to a question why does
it persist right the key reason I think
it's two things
partly people are afraid of the
alternatives but understandable reasons
there are real risks in pursuing the
alternatives I think we can understand
what those risks are and deal with them
but hold on because it seems like those
risks have been mitigated in Portugal
and Switzerland I mean we have real
evidence that those risks and that there
are unfounded
exactly you can understand it's not
crazy to have that fear but then we can
address that fear by talking about what
actually happened well why don't we
implement some sort of a small-scale
version of this I mean how come no one
has ever tried to do this you mean do it
in Vermont do it in New Hampshire doing
a small stay well there are loads of
people who want to do that but the
federal drug laws are federal right so
federal law supersedes but that doesn't
happen with cannabis so that was a
that's a big debate technically and
legally the federal government could go
off yes Colorado Washington now there's
a political decision to not do that
because cannabis legalization is popular
in those places right yes there were
people Jeff sessions when he was the
ag-1 Attorney General wanted wanted to
do that it's just our good luck that
actually he pissed off Trump over
something else because because of the
muna enquiring everything that Trump
kind of despite Jeff Sessions doing so
and the federal banking laws actually
mean that you know cannabis stores are
operating in this way
gray area they can't have thank you my
point is why is no one pushing this why
the world people are pushing that's in
America yeah so I think there are lots
of people who are pushing this that
amazing groups urge everyone to join and
support the drug policy Alliance on the
what I'm saying is why are no
politicians ever discussing this this is
never an option because those are the
only ones that are gonna really change
policy so we're seeing a big change in
public opinion that is changed on many
issues so think about when Bill Clinton
stopped being president which is you
know remember there's not how long ago
16% of Americans supported legalizing
cannabis today 70% of Americans support
legalizing cannabis is so extraordinary
transformation a very short period of
time likely brought on by the fact that
the medical use of it was prohibited
up until then I mean it was like 1994
right when it was passed and then
California started doing it and he
started having positive tax revenues
from and he started seeing people that
were suffering from a lot of ailments
it's showing that they were helped
substantially by cannabis and then the
attitude of it changed in popular
culture it changed
I mean the with Sol crazies that that
reefer madness preper reefer madness
proposition or the propaganda rather was
so effective that they did it in the
1930s and it carried on into the 90s
into the 2000s there's still people
alive today to believe some of that I
think you put that really well as a
series of things going on partly what
happened one of the major one of the
major factors that make it possible for
the drug war to continue is the
dehumanization of people at every turn
right dehumanization of drug users
mm-hmm yeah and soon we should talk
about yeast as opposed to addiction but
dehumanization of drug users
dehumanization of people with addiction
problems dehumanization of drug dealers
there's a reason why well the most
sympathetic people in my book is a
transgendered crack dealer called Chino
Harden is an amazing human being and
dehumanization of people on the supply
route countries you're hearing the way
people are talking about Mexicans now a
powerful people in this society and one
of the reasons why chasing the scream is
written as stories of people is because
the solution to dehumanization is to
recommen ization when I was meeting
these people all over the world
I kept thinking if any ordinary American
could meet Chino Harden my friend the
transgender crack dealer who is
hilarious and amazing if they could meet
Bud Osborn the homeless Street addict
who started a movement in Canada if they
could meet maricella they would not say
that the deaths of these people mean
nothing right they would not say yeah
let's pursue a policy that kills them
because we get some imaginary benefit
further down the line right think about
Lee Maddox the cop in Baltimore it was
when Edie died it was when her partner -
what are we losing these people for it's
that moment of getting people to see
everyone involved as human right we're
not there yet still the ways people are
talking about addiction are repellent
right this little thing of people as
being weak I think of people's having
poor willpower poor character and that's
why they're addicted there most people I
would I would say it's safe to venture
aren't really fully aware of what the
causes what the underlying causes of
people becoming addicted to drugs in the
first place are and what what leads
people this great sense of despair me
it's really about re-engineering our
entire culture I mean reengineering not
just the way we treat addiction but the
way we treat human beings where we treat
poor neighborhoods I mean there's
there's so much that needs to be done
that's never addressed
totally right and there's one part of
this this funny really check one thing
surprises me in this debate I have found
is actually easier in the u.s. to make
the case for compassion for people with
addiction problems than to make the case
for liberty for drug users who are not
addicted right so like we were saying
even the main drug war body in the world
the UNODC UN Office of Drug Control
admits 90% of all currently banned drug
uses what's called a non-problematic
right our friend professor Karl Hart is
the head of psychology at Columbia
University and the extraordinary human
being has done really important work
explaining this to people even with what
we think of as the devil drugs like
heroin crack the vast majority of people
who use heroin and crack do not become
addicted right which I found really
Chatwin Karl first explained that to me
I was like what's this guy talking about
and I looked at the scientific evidence
not
there was very clear evidence right that
actually the ratio of people who use any
drug who become addicted is pretty
consistently 10 to 20 percent right
slightly higher for things like heroin
but it's pretty consistently in that
zone right mmm which is not to say that
there aren't other hot heroin depresses
your breathing it can cause death that
way there other harms but which we met
addiction right um so it's interesting
there's so much I think we need to
explain to people one person here in LA
who really helped me to understand this
and the research for the book his guy
called Professor Ronald Casey go you
should you should totally have on your
shows a very it should go he was an
advisor to four American presidents he
was a WH visor to World Health
Organization really serious scientist
but he had a sideline for thirty years
we investigated animals using drugs
right and he's basically shown loads of
species love getting intoxicated for the
pleasure of it right for our elephants
yeah elephants like who's the maize
example game in Bengal of elephants who
broke into an alcohol store got really
drunk and just fucked up the whole
village right if you give if you give
hash to mice what they do is they'll
they get really horny they try to male
mice will try to mount women but then
they basically can't get up so they just
spent hours licking their own balls and
they're going cock Saturday loads of
examples is what a guy press a secret I
remember what he told me at one point
that he'd spent three years
investigating grasshoppers in cannabis
fields who just naturally live in
cannabis fields to figure out when they
eat the cannabis did they jump higher or
lower and I said I right and at the end
of your three years what did you
discover and he said they turns out they
just jump in the same height or the
other grow so it was a great use of your
three years of life but he also got you
had an interesting time when he was in
Hawaii he was investigating monkey where
the Mongoose is like hallucinogens
psychedelics and he is like spying on
these mongooses with with binoculars and
he gets he gets caught by a load of drug
traffickers who the fuck even he's like
oh don't worry I'm just investigating
where the Mongoose is likes like it's
like that is the worst fucking cover
story we've ever heard they've held them
hostage for like two days but what he
showed is something I think is really
important and there's loads of other
evidence
which is it is absolutely innate to
other species but especially to humans
the desire to get intoxicated right
there has never been a human society
anywhere in the world where people
didn't seek out intoxicants and enjoy
using them
the only society where there were no
naturally occurring intoxicants was the
Inuit Lee what used to be called the
Eskimos in the Arctic and they used to
just starve themselves to get a fucked
up head steak because that's how deep it
isn't human beings if there is nothing
in to starve yourself yeah if you starve
yourself long enough you get a kind of
fucked up head state basically how far
how long you go for I don't know if I
looked into the details of it but he
writes about that bit so it's fasting
yeah fasting causes an altered head
state but the that I've never done it
but that this this intoxication impulses
is deep in human beings as the sexual
impulse you even see it in small
children you know when lilke it everyone
will know how this memory of when you're
a little kid and you realize you can
spin round and round them round mm-hm
even though you know it will make you
sick you do it because you get an
altered headspace that is one of the
first expressions of the kind of
intoxication impulse or a really nice
example is for 2,000 years forty miles
outside of Athens in ancient Greece they
used to be once a year people would meet
as something a place called the temple
of a lusus and it was basically Burning
Man they would all use a psychedelic
together we now know what that psycho
doctors yeah it was a kind of there's
lots of different theories but I think
it was a kind of fungus basically I
cover the name of it but there's been
some research I don't know I don't want
to say it wrong it was some kind of some
kind of psychedelic wash and and like
people like Plato and Aristotle people
say you know drug Sir William Bennett
the former drug czar saying drugs are an
attack on the foundations of Western
civilization you're like no at the
actual foundations of Western
civilization the people you're holding
up as the icons like Plato and Aristotle
were literally getting fucked up in
exactly the way you say is an attack on
them right yeah it's this deep
misunderstanding so this is a natural
human impulse we are never going to get
rid of it we want to get rid of it it
gives people a lot of joy and pleasure
and yet the Oscar Wilde said once I'm
gonna get a quote slightly wrong he said
it better than this but he said
Puritanism is the deeper gnawing fear
someone somewhere is enjoying themselves
and there's this puritanical hatred of
drug use right now some of that is
understandable fears much genuine harms
and that's a different thing
but a lot of it is just a very deep
Puritanism and you really see it in one
phrase we need to get get out of the
English language is the ridiculous
phrase drugs and alcohol
it's like saying fruit and apples right
alcohol is a drug right alcohol is
easily the deadliest drug in our culture
well after tobacco it's a not saying you
know as my friend Steve roses be
campaign releases it's like saying metal
and iron right it's a meaningless phrase
but it's you this distinction between
alcohol and other drugs is is a way of
maintaining this drug war right because
the reality is the same proportion of
people become addicted to alcohol has
become addicted to cocaine right same
proportion not so not absolute numbers
come off people use alcohol of sleep and
risks from alcohol are very similar to
risk from other drugs right actually
some of them are Cod is significantly
more dangerous than some drugs that are
currently banned but we with alcohol and
it comes back to what you're saying
about why we don't change these policies
with alcohol enough people well everyone
knows people who drink alcohol right and
one of the reasons things changed on
cannabis is because more people came out
and talked about it and so you had this
situation where you've got Harry
Anslinger saying if you use cannabis
you'll you know kill your family with an
axe by the time we get to the 90s enough
people know enough people have used
cannabis to go right well Jimmy over
there ain't a hot jacket and chopping
his family to death with lakhs right
this is this is bullshit and I think one
of things we have to do is encourage
people to talk one of the weird things
is that prohibition creates a distorted
picture of overall drug use
right because loads of your listeners
might say on Facebook you know I went
out on Saturday night and I had you know
five vodka shots and I got hammered and
had a great time you'd be pretty foolish
if you put on Facebook Oh Saturday night
I went out and have five lines of coke
and I had a great night right you'd be
never far a lot of people I far let me
ask you this is there a culture where
there's no demonized use of drugs or
alcohol is there any culture that
doesn't frown upon some drugs or have
some forbidden categories for drugs what
they've been those societies throughout
history right I mean now well we've got
to understand it in the context of the
war that Harry Anslinger imposed upon
the whole world right there was no
country I mean if you think about habits
in Mexico right so Mexico had so the
1930s Anslinger says to the Mexicans
you'll notice some real parallels what's
happening now
you guys are responsible for our drug
epidemic you've got to ban drugs and
have a vicious war on drugs right and
the Mexican government alike no we can
see the policies don't work for you
we're not going to do it they had a
drugs are a drug Minister called
Leopoldo Salazar Vinnie agro they should
build fucking statues do no man has ever
been more prescient he explained to the
Americans
we don't wanna ban cannabis it's not
particularly harmful with other drugs we
should providing people with
compassionate care and if we ban drugs
the countries our country is going to be
taken over by drug lords right no one
has ever been more right about anything
the Americans the US start pressuring
Mexico more and more in the end
they cut off so all opiates for pain
relief
Houston hospitals were manufactured in
the Americas in the United States at
that time they cut off the supply all of
them people start dying in hospitals all
over Mexico in agony and the Mexicans
give in they fire this guy and they
begin the drug war and the whole journey
that leads to Ross salia Retta the guy I
know from the Zetas and Mary sellers
death that that trajectory begins at
that point and this is something we
haven't explained I think is so
important right and certainly really
surprised me learning about the history
of all this stuff at the birth of the
drug war it was intensely resisted right
think about here in LA right in Los
Angeles there was a doctor called Henry
Smith Williams when heroin was banned
there was a deliberate loophole in the
law this said ok you can't sell heroin
but doctors can prescribe it to people
with addiction problems just like what
happened in Switzerland right so here in
LA big heroin clinic prescribed
Anslinger it drives him crazy he wants
to shut it down so the mayor of Los
Angeles stands in front of this heroin
prescription clinic and says you will
not shut this down this does a good job
for us but Anslinger shuts it down when
doctors say to the there's the biggest
crackdown on doctors in American history
over 12,000 doctors are arrested and
rounded up and when they come to the one
in Portland Oregon
the doctors say but what are we meant to
do with all these vulnerable addicted
people and one of the agents said go and
throw them in the lake they'll make good
fish food right that was the attitude so
this is resisted intensely at the birth
of the drug war so you had a society
really recently that had a much more
mature exactly what you're asking about
a much more mature attitude to drug use
than we have now right it's not that
people thought all drug use is good we
should celebrate every instance of drug
use no one thinks that right there were
problems and they would there is some
joy associated with drug use that's
actually the norm there is some pain and
terrible things associated with drug use
which I'm mostly driven by underlying
harm but there are real harms that come
from some drugs as well and most
societies until very recently had a
mature appreciation of this right really
we are the outlier that most societies
have had licensed intoxicants now of
course in different societies at
different Tyler it was a Tsar of Russia
who wanted to ban tobacco right and did
terrible things to anyone who was found
with tobacco different societies have
had different panics at different times
but we are the historical outliers right
I mean to give you a sense just the
United States imprisons two million
people there has never been a society
that imprisons this many of its citizens
this higher proportion of its citizens
anywhere ever it's overwhelmingly driven
by the drug war right I mean the u.s.
imprisons so many people and the
conditions in those prisons are so
terrible that the United States is
almost certainly the first society ever
where more men have been raped than
women that's how extreme this this war
is right and what we do to people in
what this what this the Crippler the
conditions this war creates it's and
it's a total historical outlier we are
in a freak experiment right and the one
thing you can say in defense of the drug
war and I would give one bit of credit
for this is we gave it a fair shot right
the United States has done it for 100
years this country has spent a
trillion dollars on it we've imprisoned
millions of our own citizens we've
considered killed hundreds of thousands
of people at a conservative estimate
we've destroyed whole countries like
Colombia is in the problem now that
there's a gigantic business behind it
all from private prisons to prison guard
unions to the pharmaceutical industry
that would benefit from keeping most of
these drugs illegal so their profits
continue to rise to law enforcement I
mean down the line it's you'd be
disrupting like an evil industry but an
industry I think that's a real factor
but I don't want to overstate it
lots of policies have been a factor
what's the main factor the main factor
is most people asked do you think the
drug war has failed say yes and most
people ask do you want to legalize any
drug other than cannabis say no very
strong so education I think it's about I
won't use the word education can I give
you an example of a specific person who
I think showed a way to do this so in
the year 2000 in Vancouver there was a
homeless street at it called but Osborn
and and he lived in a notorious part of
Vancouver called the Downtown Eastside
people in Duncan spent kobold knew it
know it it's a place particularly that
time that had a really high like
nightmarish open drug scene right just
again people it like into it some people
injecting in the streets that kind of
thing and bad was living homeless and he
was watching his friends die all around
him at that time and there was a really
big police crackdown and so people would
go and like hide in dumpsters or in
alleyways to shoot up but obviously if
you're hiding and you overdosed no one
sees you just dying right and one day
bud he learns that one of his friends
Judith had had died and he's like I
can't just sit here and wait for all my
friends to die than for me to die but as
bud would have put it then he also
thought I'm a homeless junkie what the
fuck am I gonna do
but had a really simple idea he gathered
together a group of the other homeless
Street addicts and he said when we're
not using which is most of the time even
people on the streets what we should do
is just drop a timetable and go and look
in the places where we know people were
we shoot up right and if we see someone
overdosing we'll ring an ambulance no
officials nothing like that just does
and loads of people had descended on the
Downtown Eastside to come up with
problems to solve everything and people
were very skeptical but they liked Bud
okay what did they start going and
searching and over the next three months
the downtown the death toll on the
Downtown Eastside like had a significant
fall and obviously that meant people who
would have died were living which is a
great thing but it also meant the
addicts thought huh maybe we're not the
pieces of shit everyone says we are
right maybe we can do something like
what else can we do bud went to the
library he learned in Frankfurt in
Germany they had open safe injection
rooms but like what happened in
California until they shut it down
Anslinger shut it down where people
could go and use their drugs and be
watched by doctors and nurses and that
this had massively reduced deaths in
Frankfurt nothing like this had happened
in the United States since Anslinger
shot it all down but buds like okay
we'll persuade our mayor they set up a
group called van do the Vancouver area
network of drug users okay
the mayor was a conservative right-wing
guy called Philip Owen who have been
American comparison it's not Trump like
Mitt Romney rich guy from a privileged
family didn't know anything about
addicts he'd run for office saying all
the local drug addicts should be local
to be taken and detained to the local
military base in Chilliwack and never
let out gives she since where he's
coming from right people are not
optimistic about persuading him Vande
bad his friends they decide everywhere
Philip Bowman goes they're going to
follow him with a coffin and the coffin
had written on it who will die next
Philip Owen before you open a safe
injection site every time Phillip Owen
spoke in public one of the homeless
people with addiction problems would
stand up and say who will die next blip
her him before you open a safe injection
site and one day Dean Wilson one of the
main people in Valdez stood up and said
do you remember Julia who asked you
recently he would die next it turned out
to be her kiss you haven't done it right
this goes on for a long time they do
loads of public actions they filled up
and Homer Park which big park in
Vancouver with a cross more than a
thousand crosses each one representing
someone who had died of an overdose and
they wrote the names of the people on
the crosses and and one day after going
on for years
it only tears credit Phillip having just
said the fuck are these people what is
this and he went to meet loads of the
addicts he sat with them it blew his
mind he thought people with addiction
problems people he partied too hard and
dodged themselves
he was completely shocked he came here
to the unter states to me Milton
Friedman the Nobel prize-winning
economist who grown up under alcohol
prohibition and muttered Freeman
explains drug prohibition to Philip poet
but opponent comes back to Vancouver and
he holds a press conference and he had
the Chief of Police the coroner and I
represented with the addicts and this is
thing like I'm not going to speak again
without having the addicts here with me
about addiction because they understand
it better than me we're going to open
the first safe injection site in North
America we're going to have the most
compassionate drug policies in North
America things are going to change
around here
right the open safe injection site
Phillip Owens right-wing party is so
horrified they deselect him as their
candidate and his whole political career
ends but a more liberal guy wins the
election and the room stays open right
in the ten years that followed overdose
deaths on the Downtown Eastside fell by
80%
eight zero percent right average life
expectancy in that neighborhood rose by
ten years you just don't get figures
like that very often and I remember the
reason I set in relation to change it's
you know a big part of what I argue in
chasing The Scream any mother but lost
connection says you know we you don't
write people off right but I realized I
would have written off Phillip Owen
right wing guy runs for saying we should
lock them all up in the military base
right
you don't write off anyone you don't
know who can be persuaded by a message
of love and compassion and the most
unlikely one of the biggest champions of
my book is a conservative evangelical
Christian in Mississippi call Cristina
dent who's doing incredible work with
this right now and I thought a lot about
Phillip Owen when I went to go see
Phillip ovid on the Downtown Eastside
and he said to me he would sacrifice his
entire political career all over again
given the chance for this course he said
how often do you get to save thousands
of lives at the most vulnerable people
and after I got to know bud Osbourne the
guy who started this movement he died he
and I remember you know he's only in his
early 60s but he'd been a homeless
during a drug war it takes a toll on you
and they sealed off the streets of the
Downtown Eastside where but had lived as
a homeless person and they had this
incredible memorial ceremony and there
were loads of people at that ceremony
who knew that they were alive because of
what bud had started and cuz so many
other people had joined them and so many
people who didn't have addiction
problems that opened their hearts right
and I remember thinking that day you
know when you get disheartened about
this sin it's easy to get this hard
right this is a 100 year long drug war
we're up against very powerful forces
everyone watching your show listening to
your show is more powerful than Budd was
that day right the day he started that
right just by virtue of the fact they
have a device on which to listen to this
right bud didn't sit there thinking
someone else is going to handle this he
didn't sit there thinking are where this
is we're up against these forces that
can't be defeated
he started where he stood he appealed to
the people around him and it started
this circle of change that you know the
Canadian Supreme Court ruled because the
right-wing government at Stephen Harper
tried to shut down this injection site
and the Canadian Supreme Court ruled
that people with addiction problems have
a right to light to live and that
includes a safe place to do so drugs
that will never be taken away now right
that static is one but you know when you
have nothing else you have a voice you
have a human voice that you can use to
persuade other people with love and
compassion you can tell them stories you
can build people's love and compassion
in the middle of this catastrophe that
we're seeing in this country with the
addiction crisis right I mean more
people died last year in the opioid
crisis than all the soldiers who died in
the Vietnam War combined in the middle
of this catastrophe we can carry on
doing what we've been doing ok we can
carry on doing that then we will
continue to get the horrific results we
are now getting we can continue to copy
the places that have failed right at the
end of a hundred year long drug war
that's cost two trillion dollars we can
even keep drugs out of our prisons where
we have a wall perimeter and we pay
people to walk around it the whole time
so good luck keeping them out of a 3,000
mile border right that will never happen
that is a ludicrous fantasy you may as
well take all the money that will be
spent
trying to keep drugs out that way and
burn it in a pile right is absurd
there's never been such a society or we
can start to copy the places that have
succeeded right Portugal Switzerland
ergh why Canada there are plenty of
places that have tried the alternatives
and people who were quite skeptic was
one things that was most striking to me
in all those places is that people who
were initially skeptical and initially
thought it was crazy very often changed
their minds this is the consistent
pattern before it happens people think
it's the work of a bunch of fucking
wackos they think what people who want
to you know get everyone to use drugs
and get children to use drugs and think
it's madness and then they see that
that's not at all what motivates people
who want reform and that's not that's
not what happens in practice when you
when you adopt these policies and it's
not a magic bullet and they still have
problems but there's been such
significant improvement in all those
places that the resistance tends to I
mean how many people arguing for
reversing the cannabis legalization here
you don't ever hear it now right it's
been a little bit of a backlash and a
kind of absurd but cuz it's come out
repeating the kind of victaulic artists
I well I actually had that guy I really
tell me about yeah why I had it we had a
debate between him and Alex Bernstein
and dr. Mike Hart from Canada and
there's some there's some reality to the
dangers of cannabis used to some people
that are susceptible to schizophrenia
and I think that there's also some at
least anecdotal evidence at the points
to the fact that some people experience
these psychotic breaks and these
schizophrenic episodes probably directly
as a result of large dose use of THC
whether it's through edibles or whether
it's through smoking that some people
freak out I've known people I've known
of people that have had real issues with
it I mean had a comedian here a couple
weeks ago talked about he doesn't smoke
pot he's from Brazil he smoked pot of
use of a pan took a bunch of hits and
was fucked up for two weeks there are
there are dangers and problems young
people so it's really important the case
for legalizing cannabis is not that
there is no harm associated with
cannabis right in the same way the case
but legalizing alcohol is not there's no
harm associated this is what Alex
Bernstein is trying to go
this book I don't think he did a good
job for two reasons one because he's
basically only making the case for it to
be negative and I think there's far more
evidence that cannabis has a positive
influence on people it reinforces
community it makes people more sensitive
and kind this thought of paranoia might
actually it makes people more humble it
makes sex feel better and fakes food
tastes better there's there's creativity
aspects to it that are undeniable
there's a lot of very positive aspects
to it for some people it's not good but
it's like saying hey some people die
when they peanuts let's outlaw peanuts I
think they want your children about
peanuts yeah I think everything you just
said is is absolutely right I think
there's another layer that's going on at
the same time a kind of below that which
is really important people to understand
so there's this thing and so very often
people will say you get kind of
Republican politicians like Carter mo
Carly Fiorina saying it during on the
Republican debates in 2016 or 2015 maybe
we can't legalize cannabis because it's
much stronger now than it used to be THC
contents come on people smoking Scott
it's really important to understand why
that happened it's because of drug
prohibition so the day before alcohol
was banned in the US the most popular
drinks by far were beer and wine right
in the weeks after alcohol prohibition
ended most popular drinks again where
they're in wine as they are today
in between you could not get hold of
beer and wine the most popular drinks
were whiskey and moonshine you look at
you think well why would that be what's
going on and it's because we're kind of
slightly wonky and boring thing but I
think it's worth talking about it's
called the iron law of prohibition if
you imagine if we had to smuggle the
nearest bar to here if we had to smuggle
all the alcohol for that bar in a wagon
from the canadian book for the mexican
border right from tijuana and in a wagon
we fill our wagon with beer we're going
to get drink for a hundred people if we
fill it with vodka bringing it drink for
thousands of people right so when you
ban a drug in it has to be smuggled
around you get a premium on getting the
biggest possible kick into the smallest
possible space right this is why mild
forms of the drug disappear before an
opiates were banned in the United States
most popular way of consuming it was
something called mrs. Winslow's soothing
syrup
which you would buy in the pharmacy
right very low level of opiates most
popular way of consuming coca based
products prior to the banning was Coca
Cola right that's called that for a
reason when the ban happens heroin
becomes uniform opiates powder cocaine
becomes the only form of cocaine in fact
when there's a huge crackdown on powder
cocaine in the 80s the iron law kicks in
even more and that's when crack is
invented you can get even more of a hit
into an even smaller possible space
right so I think it's important to
understand if you what it is not good
most people who drink alcohol don't want
to drink vodka and they certainly don't
drink absinthe for most of the time
right most people want a mild form of
their drug that's true cannabis that's
true of course there's some people who
want to get totally fucked up either for
fun or because they have addiction
problems most people want a mild form of
the drug it's not good that mild forms
of the drug are when they might labview
I don't think that's true it's
definitely not true in California in
California what happened was medical
care
cannabis got passed and once medical
cannabis got passed there was an
emphasis on the strongest possible stuff
because people wanted it I mean it was a
direct result of people having higher
tolerances because marijuana was so
readily available and they if you have a
high tolerance and you smoked a lot of
pot you want strong pot because weak pot
doesn't do anything it's the number one
complaint amongst cannabis enthusiasts
is someone having weak pops you've got a
subculture of people who are cannabis
enthusiasts yeah right there's a sub
just like there's a subculture of people
who want book or absinthe right but I
don't think it's a matter it's not the
same thing I Janet obviously is more
potent than whiskey or than beer rather
it's easier to carry gin around you have
to carry less of it with cannabis people
are still buying the same quantity
they're just getting more fucked up
because their tolerances are so much
higher they need the stronger and
stronger THC so as you have a legal mark
you can have a variety of options yes
what you have is what would what we'll
discover I think as time goes by because
we notice with alcohol is different
people want cannabis to do different
things you're totally right there's some
people who want maximum THC maximally
fucked up just some people well there's
still a market for for lower grade weed
I mean they have it listed at all these
dispensaries they have it listed you
know 20% 35% they have
listed so you can choose a more mild
marijuana if you like to but the OG
people the people that do it everyday of
course they want that really potent weed
it's not like I would say they're more
like the people in Vegas who gamble are
professional gamblers versus the people
who go to Vegas for the weekend and just
want to play a roulette well there's
definitely a concentrated market of very
dedicated users who want to get
maximally fucked up you're totally right
I think that's what pushed the putt I
mean it's also an botanists and I'm
friends with a bunch of people who breed
and grow these various strains if you
think about so professor David Nutt has
done really interesting work on this so
if I remember rightly there's 38 active
components in cannabis right so
cannabinoids well there's hundreds of
cannabinoids so I think the if I'm a
professor nuts where the the he Yogi's
there's 38 kind of significant active
components maybe other people yeah
there's over a hundred cannabinoids I
think we just discussed this right and
we so one of the things he argues and
I'm happy to be corrected on a specific
number but one of the things he argues
is you've got because you're talking
mask is free air and psychosis and it's
important to understand there is some
evidence that very high exposure to THC
in a small number of people can can
leave your psychosis right and that's
even a small number of people where you
have a very widely used drug is is
that's really problematic right but
actually this is really evidence so why
do people who are prone to psychosis
schizophrenia one cannabis right there
is a lot of them who want it it's not
the people no hardly anyone wants to
have a psychotic episode it's actually
so THC correlates with with psychosis on
people but there's a another component
of cannabis called CBD cannabidiol which
actually we know there's good evidence
sue this psychosis in schizophrenia
right it's actually given us a treatment
in some places in distilled pill form so
actually it's a slightly more complex
picture than cannabis causes psychosis
right very rich THC in some people will
cause psychosis that's a real problem
there are things we can do to prevent
that and one of the good things about a
legal market is you can regulate it so
we can limit the amount of THC that is
available just like we can limit you
know you can't go and buy 70% profound
on
but also what what Professor knot has
been arguing is we need to be and they
exist but they need to be commercialized
and promoted more or promoted in public
health way not necessarily commercially
CBD rich cannabis will actually be
helpful to people with psychosis
schizophrenia so it's a slightly more
complicated pitch I know that you you're
not saying that it you're not endorsing
what the tell your kids guy what's it
called again and the guy who did your
debate our experienced yeah I know
you're not endorsing the kind of
simplistic view on either side but the
the I think it's slightly more slightly
more complicated than that
the other thing I think is really worth
saying though to people is there's one
thing we will do agree on which is
cannabis is bad for young teenagers
right is he have the developing brains
as one person that interview really
helped me to get to think about this guy
called Fred Martin's who's in I went to
going to see him in Camden New Jersey
and Fred was a cot he's retired now but
it was a cop I was really kind of
right-wing reminded me of the Clint
Eastwood character and Dirty Harry he's
not a liberal right and he had this he
wouldn't use a fancy word like this
behind epiphany about drug legalization
one day he was at a car park in Wayne
New Jersey in 1971 it was staking out a
dealer it he's in plainclothes obviously
and a kid comes up to him like an 11
year old or something and goes hey
mister and I'm not allowed to buy
alcohol will you go into that liquor
store and buy some for me and Frank goes
no get out of here so the kid walks over
to the drug dealer and buy some drugs
from him instead and fred has this kind
of realization which is oh he wouldn't
put it this way but legalization puts a
regulatory barrier between kids and
drugs that doesn't currently exist right
this is why since they legalized
cannabis in Colorado there's been a
don't overstate it's not huge but
there's been a significant fall in
teenage cannabis use right drug dealers
don't check ID license legal businesses
do they really care if they're they
because they've got something to lose
right and so I think if sometimes it's
used as the kind of protect our kids
argument is used as a case for
prohibition in fact if you want to
protect your kids you should be putting
a big premium on getting these
substances out of the hands of armed
criminal gangs and into the hands of
licensed legal businesses yeah I don't
think anybody's gonna argue that I mean
I think that anybody rational
I think that makes a lot of sense I
think that there the number of people
that have schizophrenia is fairly it's
fairly stable in terms of the percentage
of it across the board cannabis users or
non cannabis users and so the argument
against this idea that cannabis causes
schizophrenic breaks is that these
people already have schizophrenia and it
just hasn't really manifested itself in
a in a tangible sense so this is one of
things professor nut says so there's
this there is some evidence that
cannabis in a small number of people
causes psychosis as a study in Sweden
that show this with schizophrenia it's
much more contested so so psychosis
versus schizophrenia well that was the
major distinction
yeah I'm not research this in depth but
psychosis involves a different paranoia
schizophrenia is a subset of mental
illness that's very specific
has a significant genetic component
although there can be environmental
triggers for it so it could possibly
trigger both it could possibly trigger
psychosis get the argument against that
so professor so there is evidence with
psychosis the argument were stressed
it's a very small number of people but
it is real
and there are things we can do in a
legal market to counteract that that are
much harder to do in a prohibitive
market but with schizophrenia the
argument against that and I've not
looked into this in a huge amount of
detail so I don't want to this is not I
don't so it sounds great confidence I've
been saying the other stuff but
professor not argues well we know that
cannabis use has massively increased in
Britain for example I thinking like
20-fold increase since 1960 in Britain
and yet levels of schizophrenia have
remained the same if cannabis was
causing schizophrenia you would expect
it to vary with cannabis use at least to
some degree there'd be some relationship
and that doesn't seem to be the case so
again that's what Professor now who's
the former chief scientific adviser on
drugs in Britain says I haven't looked
into that in great detail side but he's
basically right on all the things that I
have looked into that he says hmm I do
they know what the mechanism would be
that would cause someone to consume THC
and have a psychotic break that does
that of an exam I don't know about it
would seem to be a big issue right like
find out what it is that's causing this
trigger and whether or not this exists
in these
anyway and maybe a stressful situation
and a bad breakup losing their job maybe
one of those things could also cause
this trip well we know with all mental
health all aspects of mental health all
mental health problems there are three
kinds of cause right there's my but loss
connections which about depression
anxiety is a lot about this there are
biological causes things like your genes
real brain changes things like the
introduction of a drug there are
psychological causes or how you think
about yourself and your place in the
world and then there's environmental
causes like you know how we live with
each other things like loneliness that
sort of thing and and in all mental
health phenomena to some degree these
three sets of causes play out so let's
think about even something very dementia
dementia has a very obviously has a
heavy biological driver right dementia
is a physical degeneration of the brain
or disease like Alzheimer's but even
with dementia which has this very heavy
biological driver we know there are big
social and psychological effects that
can mitigate it so if you're part of a
strong community and have lots of social
connections if you have a positive
self-image if you speak other languages
your dementia will develop significantly
more slowly than if you don't have any
of these factors right so with things
like psychosis there's a brilliant
person called Tanya Lerman a professor
Tanya lemon at Stanford University who's
done really interesting research and
wasn't in great detail but interviewed
her who's shown so we know recovery from
psychosis of schizophrenia is much
stronger in African countries than it is
in the United States right and it's not
a genetic thing as Africans who come to
the United States end up having the
American level of recovery not the
African level of recovery and again it's
awhile since I spoke to her I don't want
to overstate my confidence about this
but there are other people there are
people I think including her who argue
in part what's going on is in many not
all some places it's really brutal but
in many parts of Africa you remain part
of the community even if you have these
mental health problems right they have
much stronger social connections it's a
study that asks Americans
how many close friends do you have here
you could turn to in a crisis and when
they started doing it years ago the most
common answer was five today the most
common answer is none right it's not the
average but its most common answer
half of all Americans asked how many
people know you well say nobody right
it's a huge amount of evidence
loneliness is toxic for human beings
lonely people has guided a lot of
experiments on this here in LA lonely
people exposed to the flu virus and the
cold virus and the colds are way more
likely to actually get them the non
lonely people right it's just
devastating for your physical and mental
health to be lonely there's other things
going on so I think there's a whole
range of things that are going on with
all mental health problems I don't have
this relates to cannabis and psychosis I
don't want to I don't know but we know
with psychosis
yet there's a big debate about this
immigrants are more likely to have
psychosis the non-immigrants is there's
a whole lots of environmental factors
playing out even in extreme mental
health problems like now I wanna stress
it's they're not the only thing there
are real biological aspects as well
which are clearly very significant and
things like schizophrenia and play some
role in things like depression for a lot
of people but but yeah that makes sense
I mean sort of yeah I mean obviously
there's varying biological factors but
the cultural factors make sense the fact
that these people in Africa are not
they're not expelled from the community
so they have a sense of bond and maybe
it's more easy to recover and one of the
things that you hear about part of the
problem with mental illness is that
people with mental illness are pushed
away people don't want to deal with
their problem and it exacerbates
whatever is causing it in the first
place what drugs have you used I have to
be slightly careful in my answer because
I'm in an immigration process
prescription legal drugs so I used to
drug illegally that is a prescription
drug so called modafinil or premium
provigil why'd you use it illegal it's
pretty easy to get a prescription from
knowing Britain so just to explain to
people who don't know provigil is a drug
that was developed people with
narcolepsy well it's actually developed
as a performance enhancer and they just
had to find I really listen to us the
other way around how interesting they
had to find a reason to use it and the
reason to use it was to say always give
it a people with narcolepsy listen yeah
check to see if that's true because
that's how it's been explained to me by
actually by my doctor oh that's really
interesting
perfectly prepared - I don't know about
that but that sounds plausible to me
that so I think for me do you use that a
lot no so V is it now so for me I think
I didn't have an addition to that what I
had an addiction to was working all the
time my so I grew up in a crazy and
violent environment in many ways and my
way of where there's addiction and other
things and my way of coping in that
environment was to read and write all
the time to just not be present by just
working right when I was a small child
and as I got older that was really my
way of being in the world right to work
all the time and I think when I got into
my like late 20s I can't remember I
wrote an article about my deafness oh it
could I could find figure out when I
started taking it but the because I
initially wrote a positive article about
it um I was at that point where the
obsessive compulsive work wasn't working
for me right it wasn't and like a lot of
people with addictive behavior I was
doubling down on the thing that wasn't
working that well so for me modafinil
was or provisional I bought it on the
internet was a way I thought initially
and make it so I could work even more
hours do even more right and initially
when you start taking it a lot of people
take it before exams for example it it
does make you feel it's not a caffeine
buzz it wasn't for me anyway it's just
you feel like you can just you know
feeling when someone put it to me it
wasn't a scientist so it could be
bullshit but so we evolved - we have
this thing called executive focus right
I've got executive focus oh now I'm
really concentrating on what I'm saying
to you and the signals coming from you
right but obviously we can't be in a
state of executive focus all the time
right but what modafinil does is it it
makes you much more in a state of
executive focus for longer and you can
see why people evolved to do that if you
were and where we evolved if you were
being chased by a lion your brain just
switches off all the other shit and it's
like get the fuck away from the lion
right and my understanding is that
modafinil triggers that that state not a
panic state but an exec executive focus
day which is good for a while except 30
really big downsides to that firstly you
don't sleep and if you don't sleep you
go fucking crazy I'd never heard that
there's an issue with sleeping in
modafinil I really I'm vigil or provigil
in fact it's one of the positive aspects
of it that you can sleep on it oh well I
mean it was designed for people who find
it hard to stay awake so glancing hey
that's not true I'm reading what are you
reading that the guy who discovered it
Michaels you've a was a sleep study yeah
neurophysiologist and was working on the
compound ad Drac or a driven L and then
they discovered then made modafinil
which is a stronger version of that hmm
somebody is there anything that says
that it was originally developed as a
performing anything like that fucking
doctor yeah my experience was two
problems so firstly I don't know how to
run since I haven't done a huge amount
of research on this drug my experience
was firstly not sleeping which is really
bad for you over time and secondly
actually if you're in that focus mode
you so your your mind needs time
wandering mm-hmm sorry your mind needs
time to wander right it needs time you
know if I just leave here and walk out
there on the street my brain will just
start wandering around loads rise there
and then it will go back into executive
focus where I do the next interview or
whatever you need those periods when
you're not in exact focus when you're
exactly or not even recovery that's
where it is recovery is part of it
that's when your brain often has
creative thoughts right when you'll
wander it when your mind is wandering
when things will come to you because
that a certain amount of your mind is
processing things even though you're not
conscious of it right it's what I felt
with new vigil that it didn't know vigil
or provigil they're very similar that it
didn't seem like there was much
creativity going on that it was a more
of like a grunt tool how long did you
use it I mean I I would not use it
regularly I would take it like once a
couple weeks once a week or so like that
how long
I think I did it for like a year a year
or so then I just stopped I haven't
taken it in years right right but I
liked it did you I got it from some guy
was a biohacker
he was the one who told me about it and
he said it was pretty easy to get a
prescription for it got a prescription
for it and it just gave you like this
pepped up sense of focus and awareness I
felt like you get a lot done when you're
on it but it didn't seem like it helped
with those wandering creative thoughts
as you were saying yeah if I was ever
gonna do exams again which fortunately
I'll never do in my life I will I would
use that but I think I think you're
right and I think but again think about
that about in relation to addiction I
think often when you talk about saying
like work addiction right which is
obviously caused by the partly childhood
trauma that I'd experienced there's been
a real change in how we think about that
as well it relates back to what was
saying right at the start about Chemical
hooks right so if you look at the debate
about non drug based addictions right
you think about 20 years ago people
start talking about sex addiction and a
guy called Stanton Peale who interviewed
a lot first writes about love addiction
or something exactly gambling addiction
at the time initially what people says
well this is bullshit because they
believe the chemical hooks they're in
addiction right so it just seems like
well that's not I mean there's an
episode of Cheers actually which now
would be yeah you wouldn't do this but
there's an episode where the whole
hilarious premise of the show is that
what's the Ted Danson case a Malone Ted
Danson's character thinks he's a sex
addict and this is like a punchline all
the way through the show right this is
the attitude that it ends where they go
through an meeting of six end love
addicts Anonymous and like there's some
woman talking about how she gets like
has sex with every man and it ends with
him just putting his arm around her and
that's the end of the the end of the
show right that wouldn't happen in a
sitcom now people people thought well it
might but people people don't think the
very idea of sex addiction is ridiculous
in the way they did right I don't think
I think maybe they do maybe but then I
think that's because there hasn't been a
shift in gamble if you go to a meeting
at gamblers anonymous as I have with a
friend I don't have a gambling problem
but just to support someone they are as
addicted as anyone in the next roams
down at narcotics not even on a lot I've
known a lot of gambling addicts and did
you feel that they were seduced
they're straight-up junkies and they
might as well be chasing crack and that
tells us something really important
because you don't snort a roulette wheel
right you don't inject a online poker
right if you can have a professor Nutt
said this to me if you can have all of
the addiction but none of the chemical
hooks that tells us about how we've
overestimated the role of Cal there is
an addiction chemical hook there's a
dopamine addiction
well absolutely everything you do that
you like gives you dopamine it dopamine
hit so I think there's been this attempt
to integrate it by going oh well there's
this pleasure in the brain and but it's
not a self-destructive issue there's
something about gambling there's a lot
of self-hate involved and this this
overwhelming feeling of failure that a
lot of gambling addicts have because
they fail so often and they're they're
always trying to chase the dragon
they're always trying to make up for all
the past things they've gone wrong this
big score with this big score we're
gonna settle it out somebody told me
about I just think about what you're
saying in relation to him a guy called
Peter Cohen he's a professor in the
Netherlands who actually didn't say
system he'd rather I read it he says we
shouldn't call it addiction we should
call it bonding the human beings have an
innate need to bond and connect right
and when you're happy and healthy your
bond and connect with like the people
around you with meaningful work but if
you can't do that because you're
isolated or traumatized or beaten down
by life or you haven't taught how to do
that you will bond with something that
gives you some sense of relief right now
for some people that might be porn for
some people that might be gambling some
people are I'd be cocaine alcohol
whatever but he says if you if you only
have one bond that's giving you any
relief you will obsessively return to
that bond right and I think that's a
total ex he would say that's not a total
explanation for what's going on I do
think that is a useful way to think
about some of these behavioral
addictions right so I someone I know
very well a relative of mine has a
gambling addiction and this is someone
who has no alternative form of joy or
pleasure in their life right and
gambling gives a moment about lots of
moments
if you look at somebody's playing online
poker as I'd done I'm a relative
they're not happy it's not looking at
someone watching a nice movie right it's
you can see I don't mean sorry I should
be get someone with an addiction problem
playing online poker some people and
most people don't have a problem right
it's the it's the relief of just being
absent from your life for a moment or
for however long you play rather than I
went to this for lost connections from a
book about depression I went to the
first ever internet rehab center
in the United States it's a weird places
impressive place that I like the people
there it's in Spokane and just outside
Spokane in Washington it's called
restart restart Washington and I
remember going there really happy
it was reintroduce and I remember
arriving it's a clearing in the woods
right a big wooden place in the clearing
the woods and I remember absolutely
instinctively looking at my phone and
feeling really when a minute I got the
cop I'm feeling really pissed off I
couldn't check my email I'm like wait
you're in the right place right and it's
really cuz they get all kinds of people
and restart Washington but they
disproportionately get young men who are
obsessed with multiplayer Rob play games
like then it would have been World of
Warcraft now it'd be fortnight and
speaking to these young men you have
this realization talking to the woman
who runs it it's amazing woman called
dr. Hillary cash who said to me you've
got to ask if I think it relates to its
aim at gambling you've got to ask what
these young men are getting out of this
game because they're getting something
out of it right and she argues that one
of the things they're getting is the
things they used to get from the culture
but no longer get like what well are
feeling they're good at something a
feeling that other people see them that
they're part of a tribe feeling that
they're moving around you know and kids
spend very little time outdoors now
right I think there's also anticipation
there's puzzles there's things we were
trying to figure out whether or not
something's right or wrong and how to
get it and then if you do get it you get
this positive surge if you don't get and
I think there's a human reward systems
that are being mirrored there in
gambling and what psychologists call
called that feeling of mastery the
Masters when you feel you are good at
something right it's an
absolutely underlying psychological need
everyone needs to feel they good at
something if you don't have a sense of
mastery in your life you will be
depressed and anxious right oh you're
much more likely to become depressed and
anxious and I think again because it's
very striking to me I've got teenage
nephews I've got godson's we actually
don't ask anything of young men right
very rarely are they actually asked to
do very much they're not given
responsibilities right I think I look
again I want to stress that most people
playing video games are not addicted
it's perfectly good for my pleasure
they're very addictive I mean they're
not most people playing them have a
healthy relationship with them and same
way that I don't know if that's true I
can maybe I yeah tell me about I think a
lot of people playing them have a real
problem with them they take up massive
hours at a time it's a giant problem
with young boys I mean the thing is it's
become an actual Avenue for a career now
there's eSports careers where these
young guys are making millions of
dollars playing video games it's not
like the old days where you would say
hey you're wasting your life now it's
basically almost like practicing golf
but we have a setup back here where we
play video games against each other it's
very addictive don't you think it's
addictive sure yeah so it's like
basketball when I was younger too I
loved playing basketball couldn't get me
to play in the rain right the basketball
has movement and exercise attached to it
so you get some positive benefit from
that addiction I was definitely addicted
to jiu-jitsu
I would even train when I was injured
you know but what does that mean it
means I enjoyed it more than I enjoyed
not doing it
the difference between a lot of
videogame addictions and particularly
gambling addictions is that they tend to
wreck people's lives you know you have
this period of jujitsu addiction did you
did you because the conditioning
distinction there what are you doing it
to avoid some kind of pain in your life
what were you doing it because you just
really deeply loved it's really fun
right I'll see you chasing the thrill
I'm certain that was avoiding pain with
almost everything I've done in my life
in some way shape or form you know
there's some of it where you're trying
to do something positive to mitigate the
pain or the frustration or the anger or
whatever it is that's bothering you but
I don't you know I the video game thing
was a real addiction though it's like a
compulsion and I was it
years how did years how did you get out
of it jack I quit I just quit cold
turkey stop playing I realize it was
kind of messing up my life in my career
which is taking up way too much time and
I just I came to a realization I was
like I got to stop doing this I'm just
playing way too much so I just said the
only way I'm just too competitive I
enjoyed it too much and so the only way
to do it was just stop playing it all
together and we started playing it again
recently after more than shit more than
15 years of ever playing it at all you
know and it's still addictive but I'm so
busy now I can't really fall into the
grip of it I'm actually just enjoying it
for an hour here or there but that's so
interesting itself isn't it that's a bit
like the rap part principal it first
made correct me if I'm wrong that like
the more you have in your life that is
meaningful that is good and gives you
pleasure or seize mastery the less space
there will be for these objects of
obsessions come in right and I think
that is a principle that's true
this was the principle behind the
Portuguese drug decriminalization right
if we give people good lives they will
not want to anesthetize themselves so
much it was the Swiss principle and I
think we all see that in our lives two
different degrees I you know the happier
I am the less I want to turn to you know
the behaviors that I developed a child
to avoid being present with like
violence and aggression like I don't
think of like writing as an addiction it
might be a compulsion if I have a day
when I don't do it I feel terrible but
something that is positive and rewarding
I don't think is an addiction right
something that enriches your life and is
not it's a way of living life the most
fulfilling way calming obsession maybe a
positive obsession yeah a compulsion
obsession a way of being in the world
right like I don't it's like sometimes I
get people saying to me you know like Oh
am i addicted to sex and or whatever and
you want to set it off and say well does
it give you pleasure does it is it is it
and is it a way of avoiding pain if it
gives you pleasure and it's not a way of
avoiding pain it's not an addiction it's
just a way a happy way of being in the
world
right and that's the reality for and
again I think it's really helps us
because - partly what I'm arguing your
loss in in loss collation and tasting
scream is we need to deeply
reconceptualize how we think about these
forms of pain like depression and an
addiction and this isn't some wacky
basis the view of the World Health
Organization these leading medical
bodies when it comes to depression the
the yeah sorry now people that are a
journalists and writers often like
stimulants they often like adderall
adderall is a big issue for for for
journalists how much experience do you
have without at all I've never used it
it's supposed to be amazing yeah I've
never used it precisely because I know I
would love it
right like I would I've got a young
relative who's prescribed it and there
are times when I've been telling ya he's
offered tried to not spike me but like
get me to join him and this is for you
but you know this adderall I piss up a
whole are thing right which is this what
you're talking about again which is I'm
not against people obviously not against
people using drugs in order to enhance
their lives look I have before I came
here I drank enough caffeine to kill a
whole fucking field of cows right
I could probably tell I'm I personally
limit my stimulant use because because I
know I I can enjoy it yeah yeah and I
can tell that I could easily a bit like
the modafinil when I start using at
modafinil I got that since I just used
it every day for three months right
which was a ludicrous thing to do but I
think in terms of stimulants there's a
whole debate that needs to be had now
I'm going to write about this at some
point but one in ten thirteen-year-old
boys in this country is being given a
stimulant drug right in any given year
right for a DD or ADHD or I mean that
yeah horrified it's crazy right
thirty percent of children in foster
care in the United States have been
given at least one psychiatric drug yeah
these are not children in the main who
are you know have some biological
insanity these are kids have been
fucking abused and untreated abysmally
and what do we do we drug them to shut
them up right arts also children have
of energy and it's not easy to control
them and so they decide that these
children have something wrong with them
do you know I went to this Amish village
but lost connections but one things
that's very interesting there are these
people who argue and there needs to be
more research on this but Amish children
don't get ADHD right and this is big
debate what's going on there and so this
one argument which is then obviously not
exposed to digital media which may and
there's some evidence of just speaking
to Professor Steven Lee here but people
are giving lot loads of ADHD when hours
in school exactly so exactly said that's
just because I spoke to go at UCLA
professor Stephen H and there's some
effect to digital media but it's not
massive right right I think what's
happening from the very small amount
researcher talking to the Amish is you
know I'd say to them do you have kids
who don't want to sit still and they go
yeah we let them go off and go fishing
right the Amish don't want to make you
sit still for eight hours a day right
there's nothing in their society that
I'm Nydia problems we're getting a child
to sit still for eight hours a day
insane just like trying to get a puppy
exactly that's exactly the right analogy
what we do to our children we try to
deaden them and discipline them to cope
and thrive in a deadened and disciplined
and inverted commas economy right if you
the school system is designed in the
1870s to prepare people to work in
factories right if you're going to work
in a factory in the 1870s what do you
need you need to learn to shut the fuck
up not complain be passive do what
you're told
write it this is a I think it's a guy
called Alfred Kohn
I think is him who says every school has
two curriculums or curricula wherever
the plural is you've got the official
curriculum which is like geography
history whatever and then you have the
hidden curriculum which was the kind of
person the school is trying to make you
into right and what is the school system
designed to be it's designed to make
people who are passive who are obedient
who sit still and shut the fuck up right
now that was never a good way to make
humans right that was always wrong but
it's particularly awful in the you know
the culture we've created but and this
relates to one of the causes of
depression that I write about in loss
Commission's which is you know it's
really good I notice that loads the
people I know who are depressed and
anxious
the depression and anxiety focuses
around their work we talked about this
last time I was on a thing and but it's
not okay people I know maybe they're
unusual right so I started to look at
the evidence-based Gallup did a really
big study of people in the US and Europe
see what do people feel about their work
right 13% of people one three percent
liked their work most of the time 63
percent of what they called sleep
working you know like it you don't hate
it you kind of tolerate it and 24% of
people fucking hate and fear their jobs
alright so you think about that that
means 87% of people don't like the thing
they're doing most of the time now that
can't be far off what the figure was in
the Soviet Union right that's a really
extreme vigor and I don't like so I'm
looking at this I'm thinking okay
hit this bear some relationship to our
mental health crisis right this thing
that we don't like is spreading over
more and more of our day the average
person I think answers their first email
I think it's 7:40 3 a.m. and leaves work
at 7:15 p.m. right what and I learned
this an amazing Australian social
scientists are went to interview
professor Michael Marmot who discovered
the key factor that causes depression at
work right if you go to it's not the
only one a key factor if you go to work
tomorrow and you are controlled so you
have low or no control over your work
you're much more likely to become
depressed and anxious I think it relates
to what we've been talking about all
along people have psychological needs
you need to feel you're good at
something you lose film your life has
meaning if you're controlled all the
time you can't feel that right so when I
first learned this I'm a burr
first time I went to see professor
Marmot misunderstanding the implications
of this cuz I thought he was saying
wrongly I thought he was saying okay got
this 13% of elite people at the top like
you and me get to have jobs we love and
then you've got everyone else who's
condemned to the shit round I thought
about my family my brother is an uber
driver my my dad was a bus driver my
grandmother clean toilets on that way
are we saying they're just condemned to
these miserable lifes and explain to me
it's not the work that makes you
depressed right it's being controlled at
work and there are solutions to that
there are changes we can make right I
went to interview this woman I called a
Meredith Keough in Baltimore it's been
part of this really interesting change
and sometimes some people listening are
gonna think I'm gonna say they should do
this and they gonna think I can't do
that
it's right this is an argument something
else so Meredith used to go to bed every
Sunday night just sick with anxiety
right
she had an office job it wasn't the
worst office job in the world as she
would tell you she wasn't being bullied
or harassed or anything but it was
boring it was controlled couldn't just
stand the thought this was gonna be the
next 40 years of her life so one day
with her husband Josh Meredith did this
quite bold thing Josh her husband had
been working in bike stores since he was
a kid in Baltimore teenager and you know
that's controlled work it's insecure you
don't even have rights really and one
day Josh and his colleagues in the bike
store and they asked themselves what
does our boss actually do okay they
liked their boss he wasn't a bad person
but they were like we seem to fix all
the bikes and he seems to make all the
money this doesn't seem like such a good
deal to me right so they decided they
were gonna set up a bike store that
works on different principle right the
place they work before was a corporation
most people listening to your show
working corporations you know how it's a
very recent human invention you know how
it works as an army the boss at the top
is like the little dictator you got to
obey Him or leave right and sometimes
he's a nice dictator and sometimes he's
Kim jong-un but you know you don't much
say over that right um Josh and his
colleagues decided to set up a bike
store that works on a different
principle it's not a corporation as a
democratic cooperative so they don't
have a boss they run the business
together they take decisions about it
together they have a meeting once every
couple of weeks and practice they agree
but you know sometimes they don't and
then they vote they share the profits
they share out the good tasks and the
shitty tasks and one thing that was so
interesting to me their business is
called Baltimore bicycle works spending
time with them totally in line with
Professor marmots findings is you know
giving them back control over their work
made them much less unhappy depressed
and anxious right and it's not like you
know they quit their jobs fixing bikes
and went off to become Beyonce's backing
singers right they fix bikes before they
fix bikes now differences now they've
got control over their work right giving
people back control over their work is a
really powerful antidepressant now every
corporation could be it could be a
democratic cooperative right that's a
big change in our society but it's yeah
we've all lived through big changes in
our society there's no reason
and by the way it would be better for
the economy study at Cornell University
found democratic workplaces grow on
average four times faster than non
democratic workplaces because people are
more committed they're bringing more of
their energy and their life to it the
the we've got to understand it goes back
to why the addiction is so bad as we've
got understand people who are showing
these signs of distress depression
anxiety addiction they're doing that not
because they're crazy there are some
biological factors that are not rational
but mostly it's just actually we've
built a society that's not good for them
and we should be listening to that and
respecting that and like the guy doctor
in Vietnam said to me listen to your
nausea it will tell us what's wrong with
you we should be listening to their
nausea and using it as a kind of fuel to
change change the way we live in ways
that will make or won't just make people
who depressed and anxious and addicted
better off everyone's life will be
better off if they control their work
more if you go through some of the other
big solutions to depression anxiety that
I write about in in loss connections now
lasts connections is your most recent
book yeah that's the one about
depression sad about it yeah yeah
they're both available them now last
connections how did the two of them tie
together so I wrote chasing the screen
because of this addiction in my family
and I go on this big journey all over
the world to understand the drug war and
I said a line in my I did a TED talk
about it called everything you think you
know about addiction is wrong and I said
a line in that which is the opposite
prediction is connection I said earlier
in our conversation based on rat Park
right and lots of people started saying
to me well are you just saying it's
social isolation right like loneliness
and I very clearly in my moment know
that I don't think that's the lesson of
rat Park right I don't think that's just
what's going on in rat pockets they
don't have anything that makes life
meaningful now rats are obviously much
more much less complex than us right so
I started thinking well what what is
actually missing for people who are
addicted depressed anxious what is
driving this crisis so I think that
question that people kept asking me I
could see that Portugal in Switzerland
had dealt with
some problems of disconnection but you
went quite rightly to the port question
which what did Switzerland deal with
right I couldn't quite I didn't quite as
cuz I didn't quite understand when I was
in Switzerland so I ended up again going
on this big journey all over the world
from a crazy mixture of places like an
Amish village and Indiana because the
Amish have low levels of depression to a
lab in Baltimore where they're giving
people psychedelics to your city and
Brazil that banned advertising to see if
that would make them feel better did it
which bit banning advertising yeah yep
so that's not be properly scientifically
study but there is a science that tells
as it should I can spray more that easy
but so this is everyone knows that junk
food has taken over our diets and made
us physically sick right but there's
this really interesting evidence that a
kind of junk values have taken over our
minds and made us mentally sick so for
thousands of years philosophers have
said if you think life is about money
and status and how you look to other
people in a kind of showing off way
you're gonna feel like shit right it's
not an exact quote from Confucius but
that is the gist of what he said right
but weirdly nobody had ever
scientifically investigated this until
an incredible guy I got to know called
Professor Tim caso who's at Knox College
and Illinois and professor Kassar made
some really important breakthroughs in
this so there's two ways everyone
listening to your show has two kinds of
motivation in their life right we're all
a mixture of both so imagine if you play
the piano in the morning because you
love playing the piano it gives you joy
right that would be what's called an
intrinsic reason to play the piano right
you're not doing it to get anything out
of it that's just that's the thing you
love right it sounds like jiu-jitsu was
like that bu writing is like that for me
everyone will have something in their
life that just gives them joy as they do
it right okay now imagine you played the
piano not I don't know not because you
love it but because your parents are
massively pressuring you it's their
dream for you or in a dive bar that you
can't stand to pay the rent
or could impress a woman right that
would be what's called an extrinsic
reason to play the piano right you're
not doing it because that thing gives
you joy you're doing it to get something
further down the line right now
obviously we're all an extra base but
professor Kassar showed a couple of
really interesting things firstly
the more you are driven by extrinsic
values the more your intrinsic values
are starved the more likely you are to
become depressed and anxious but quite
significant amount he also showed as a
culture as a society we have become much
more driven by these junk values right
we've become much more driven by think
about how Instagram makes you feel sure
right we've become much more driven by
this hollow external sense of it
think about something simple as I will a
while ago I was at Elton John's last
night in Caesars Palace right amazing
thing to be at and about half the
fucking room is is filming it on that
isn't even looking at out and John
they're just watching it through their
phone now that's a small example but you
can see what they're doing in order to
display their life to invite Envy from
other people they are not living their
life no one wants to watch your shitty
video about them John there's a hundreds
of thousands of in videos about in John
that are much better than yours right
why are you doing that you're never
gonna watch it either you're doing it to
say to other people envy me right it
doesn't make you feel good in that room
actually makes you feel worse you're not
enjoying the experience and it makes
them feel like shit because it makes
you're trying to invite Envy and your
friends that's a small example of a much
wider thing of a kind of junk values
that have taken our minds so the reason
that relates to what you're asking about
Brazil is professor Castro has shown
those two sets of solutions to these
junk values taken over our minds one is
it's like fucking air pollution you know
get the messaging out of your head more
eighteen month old children know what
the McDonald's M means then know their
own surname their own last name right
from the moment it's Professor Casa put
it to me from the moment we're born
we're immersed in a machine that is
designed to get us to neglect what is
important about life right none of your
listeners will lie on their deathbeds
and think about all the shit they bought
and all the likes they got an Instagram
they'll think about moments of meaning
in connection that's like a banal
obvious thing but we're constantly
pushed to not think in those terms to
think about show it off buy spend right
these junk values have taken over our
minds so part of the solution is just
fucking get rid of most of this
advertising get rid of most of this you
know very tightly regulated but
in doing so you limit Commerce you're
limiting people's ability to sell things
you're you're changing the current
market that a lot of people don't have
any problem with I know this is a heresy
in the United States but well I'm
limiting commercial speech is fine by me
yeah I think it's fascinating I think
it's a fascinating discussion but it is
in the in a sense it's limiting free
speech as well I mean and we have a real
problem with that the problem with it is
that as soon as you start to put any
regulations at all and you know you say
oh you shouldn't be allowed to
advertising to advertise even if it's
advertising honestly about a great
product people will have real issues
with this we already have advertising
regulation you can't you can't pop an
advert saying I've found the cure for
cancer right that's what I'm saying yeah
so this is I would argue this is a
tightening so for example in London
there was a big controversy a couple
years but skinny billboards exactly says
this it was a billboard of a impossibly
hot women an impossibly hot man and the
billboard said something like are you
Beachbody ready right the clear
implication being if you don't look like
these people who you'll never fucking
look like you're not ready to go to the
beach and the Mayor of London Sadiq Khan
just said this you can't do this right
why you can stop advertise your body
building that's so silly I mean this is
it's not an unobtainable ideal you're
looking at two examples of it okay
they're real human beings yeah but
that's like I mean I know why I mean I
was not saying that you have to be that
way but if you do want to look like that
man and have that body it is a possible
goal I mean it's not possible for the
vast majority of people right like if
they don't have the time or the effort
it's not but very many people have
radically changed their body I'm not
saying no I'm not saying you should do
it I thought it is a possible thing to
do and if you're trying to sell Fitness
wouldn't you sell an example of someone
who's really good at it like if you're
trying to sell a business course
wouldn't you show a guy with a giant
house and a Ferrari like this is the guy
who's done really well at business look
at his penthouse apartment overlooking
Manhattan you wouldn't shut you wouldn't
say well that's an impossible goal I'm
gonna show you a person in a
middle-class suburb because as good as
you ever gonna get I think that's a fair
point it's two things going on isn't
there there's the freedom of people to
market where they want to do
and there's two nanny state issue there
you have a problem with by saying that
yeah these are impossible to achieve
body goals we already have regulation of
these things so and people don't call
that a nanny state thing I think so just
as I have regulation these thing but
that that is you're not I mean this I
don't think there's a good example
what's a better example so professor
caso said there's two sets of solutions
these junk values problems
there's get the contaminants out of the
atmosphere sort of thing which he says
is actually a weaker one than the second
set of solutions is so how do we stop
people being pumped full of bullshit
junk values right educate them on what
it's happening to them and make it less
appealing well this is the second part
and you've gone to what I think was most
important part of the research professor
Casa did she was working with a guy
called Nathan Dungan and Nathan is a or
entity Nathan is a financial adviser in
Minneapolis and his job was to work with
adults who found trouble budgeting and
explained budgeting to them and help
them do it
right and he gets a call from a school I
was kind of middle-class school wasn't
super rich wasn't poor it was a middle
class where they're having a problem
that the kids at this school were
becoming obsessed we're getting like the
latest Nike sneakers or the latest
iPhone or whatever it was and if their
parents couldn't afford it the kids were
really freaking out right so they say -
Nathan would you come in and just
explain budgeting to these kids right so
anything goes in he tries to explain
budgeting and quickly realizes these
kids may give a shit about budgeting
right there's something else going on
here
they are so obsessed with getting these
things so with Professor Kassar he
designs this program that led to a
really interesting breakthrough and
saying people can try at home right you
don't have to do in this context so
they've got and you can do it just as
adults but they did it with parents and
their teenagers right they come in it
was once every couple of weeks for think
four months and at first they just say
the first meeting they had they just
said write a list of everything you have
got to have
I didn't define that right and people of
course say like a home a car whatever
but quite quickly people would say Nike
sneakers the parents would name
expensive things and they got okay tell
me how you would feel if you got these
Nike sneakers right and very rarely I
only any of them were like basketball
players
I need the jump or whatever if that's
the right phrase it was very off almost
immediately I'd be accepted by the group
people would envy me right yeah these
insights are just beneath the surface
where they go who put that idea in your
head where did you get that idea
and of course everyone thinks they're
smarter than the ad but giving people
the ability just to see how hollow those
junk values were that was the first part
second part was much more interesting it
took longer then I would have in future
sessions they'd say well okay given
that's not actually made you feel better
what are moments in your life when you
have that satisfied happy in a flow
state what are things that are
meaningful to you people you know whole
range of things playing sports playing
music reading whatever it was right and
they said okay how could we build more
of that into your life and less of these
junk values how could you do more of
this every week and just meeting we
don't have these conversations in our
culture by often just meeting once every
couple of weeks and check-in emulator
and go actually I managed to play a
guitar for an hour every day I managed
on Saturday to take my kid to the beach
and we went or whatever you know stifled
materialism what it led to Sosa's
monitored by Professor Kassar it led to
a significant shifts in people's values
that they they had a significant
decrease in junk values and a
significant increase in in more
meaningful intrinsic values and we know
that that correlates with lower
depression and anxiety over time the
weird thing is I sometimes feel like
with all my with both my books chasing
screaming lost connections I sometimes
feel like I'm giving people permission
to know the thing they already know
right right like I had this completely
bizarre experience when the book first
came out where I was being lost
connections to depression when I was
being interviewed by some American
incipio here was and I talked about how
loneliness causes depression right and
the interview goes saying like well this
is a very controversial theory I'm kind
of sitting there and I thought how did
we get to the point we're pointing out
the most fuckin obvious thing you can
imagine that if you're really lonely are
much more likely to become veterans as
controversial oh I think they're persons
I think the reason it's controversial is
because these biological stories which
have some trait in them have dominated
how one
I was a teenager I went to it's only
thought of as being exactly a little
issue when I when I went to my doctor
when I was a teenager and I was really
depressed and I said I had this feeling
like a pain was leaking out of me and I
couldn't control it my doctor told me an
entirely biological creature said
there's just a problem with your brain
here and all you need to do is drug
yourself right and I dragged myself and
I got some relief from the chemical
antidepressants but it did not solve my
depression and one of the reasons I
wrote lost connection sis cuz after 13
years I've taken the maximum possible
dose I was like well what's going wrong
here there's something missing in this
picture because I still feel depressed
and every year that I've been alive I'm
40 depression and anxiety have increased
in the United States in Britain and
across the Western world there's
something missing in this picture and I
think the reason why that's
controversial it seemed controversial
that women even though to you and me is
crazy to think it's controversial is
because these biological stories which
have some basis in reality have become
the whole of the picture for a lot of
people right I had a completely bizarre
experience where you know Peter teal if
you had him on your show no but I know
I'm yes a pizza teal people who don't
know is the founder of PayPal gazillion
a right back to the Trump campaign I got
an invitation from Peter teal just
before it was after Trump had been
elected but before he'd been inaugurated
his people to go to a they were
organizing a conference for app
developers who were trying to develop
apps to deal with depression anxiety and
addiction and I'm a bit like I don't
think apps are really the solution but I
would add an excuse to go to San
Francisco anyway so I go it's a day-long
conference I didn't hit every speech but
some really great scientists before what
Thomason saw who's their former head of
the National Institute of Health who's a
hugely admirable man and I've seen their
and I'm like all they're doing is
looking at pictures of brain scans right
if all you knew about depression and
anxiety was this conference and
addiction you would literally think they
were just things that happen inside the
brain yes and I'm like the last person
up at I think this was designed this way
maybe they did I'm seeing that I'm
thinking what do I say to these people
and I thought you know it's like I was
trying to get metaphors you could have a
conference about obesity that just
looked at scans of people's stomachs
right
it wouldn't be untrue it wouldn't be bad
science we had missed the whole fucking
reason why they're fat right
you could you could tell the plot of
Romeo and Juliet using like Newtonian
physics you could draw a diagram Romeo
moves this way Juliet mister you won't
understand a damn thing about why anyone
does anything right it was such a deep
misunderstanding or not misunderstanding
such a partial truth right and I said to
them so we were in San Francisco we were
really near the Tenderloin which I'll
see people will know as a place with a
lot of chaotic Street addiction it's
like let's not discuss this let's all
just walk over to the Tenderloin sit
with the first person with an addiction
problem we may listen to their life
story for half an hour and come back and
tell me the main problem here is a
malfunction of the amygdala it's a
bizarre miss understand is there
something going on because amygdalas yes
is it important to understand that
science of course right I'm strongly in
favor of brain science I'm in favor of
the science of understanding the stomach
but it's a bizarre reduction of what
human beings are to think that these are
the main drivers of these crises right
yes it's ridiculous yeah so I agree and
we have to wrap this up we're worried
after I really dread this joke can I
just say that anyone who wants any more
information if I can whip me if I don't
say this anybody wants any more
information about either of my books
chasing the scream is WWH acing the
scream calm you can listen to audio
blows the people we've talked about you
take a quiz to see how much you know
about addiction and lost connections is
WWE lost connections common there are
audiobooks of both those books as well
that you can get on those sites
beautiful thank you very much really
enjoy Joe Cheers thank you very much
Thanks
[Music]